*Writing committee members are required to recuse themselves from voting on sections to which their specific relationships with  industry may apply; see Appendix 1 for detailed information. PEER REVIEW COMMITTEE MEMBERS Andrew D. Krahn, MD, FHRS, Chair; Jason G. Andrade, MD, FHRS; Craig J. Beavers, PharmD, FACC, FAHA, FCCP, BCCP, BCPS  (AQ-Cardiology), CACP; James M. Bischoff; T. Jared Bunch, MD, FACC, FHRS; Kristen Bova Campbell, PharmD, FACC; Lin Yee  Chen, MD, MS, FAHA, FHRS; Robin Dharia, MD, FAHA; Michael P. Dorsch, PharmD, MS, FACC, FAHA; Edward P. Gerstenfeld,  MD, MS, FACC, FHRS; Aubrey E. Jones, PharmD, MSCI; Stephanie Dwyer Kaluzna, PharmD; Luke Masha, MD, MPH; Isabelle  Nault, MD; Peter A. Noseworthy, MD, FHRS; Cara N. Pellegrini, MD, FACC, FHRS; Stylianos E. Tzeis, MD; Annabelle Santos  V olgman, MD, FACC, FAHA; Emily P. Zeitler, MD, MHS, FACC ACC/AHA JOINT COMMITTEE ON CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES Joshua A. Beckman, MD, MS, FAHA, FACC, Chair; Catherine M. Otto, MD, FACC, FAHA, Chair-Elect; Anastasia L. Armbruster,  PharmD, FACC; Leslie L. Davis, PhD, ANP-BC, FACC, FAHA; Lisa de las Fuentes, MD, MS, FAHA; Anita Deswal, MD,  MPH, FACC, FAHA; Victor A. Ferrari, MD, FACC, FAHA; Adrian F. Hernandez, MD, FAHA; Heather M. Johnson, MD, MS,  FAHA, FACC; W. Schuyler Jones, MD, FACC; Prateeti Khazanie, MD, MPH; Michelle M. Kittleson, MD, PhD, FACC; Debabrata  Mukherjee, MD, FACC, FAHA; Latha Palaniappan, MD, MS, FAHA, FACC; Tanveer Rab, MD, FACC; Jacqueline E. Tamis-Holland,  MD, FACC, FAHA; Y . Joseph Woo, MD, FACC, FAHA; Boback Ziaeian, MD, PhD, FAHA PRESIDENTS AND STAFF American College of Cardiology B. Hadley Wilson, MD, FACC, President Cathleen C. Gates, Chief Executive Officer Richard J. Kovacs, MD, MACC, Chief Medical Officer Mindy J. Saraco, MHA, Director, Clinical Policy and Guidelines Grace D. Ronan, Senior Production and Operations Manager, Clinical Policy Publications Leah Patterson, Project Manager, Clinical Content Development American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology Thomas S.D. Getchius, National Senior Director, Guidelines Abdul R. Abdullah, MD, Director, Guideline Science and Methodology American Heart Association Joseph C. Wu, MD, PhD, FAHA, President Nancy Brown, Chief Executive Officer Mariell Jessup, MD, FAHA, Chief Science and Medical Officer Nicole Aiello Sapio, EdD, Executive Vice President, Office of Science Strategies and Operations Radhika Rajgopal Singh, PhD, Senior Vice President, Office of Science and Medicine Prashant Nedungadi, BPharm, PhD, Vice President, Science and Medicine, Clinical Guidelines Anne Leonard, MPH, BSN, RN, FAHA, National Senior Director, Science and Medicine Jody Hundley, Senior Production and Operations Manager, Scientific Publications, Office of Science Operations ARTICLE INFORMATION This document was approved by the American College of Cardiology Clinical Policy Approval Committee and the American Heart  Association Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee in July 2023, and the American College of Cardiology Science and  Quality Committee and the American Heart Association Executive Committee in August 2023. Supplemental materials are available with this article at https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/suppl/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001193 This article has been copublished in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology. Copies: This document is available on the websites of the American College of Cardiology (www.acc.org) and the  American Heart Association (professional.heart. org). A copy of the document is also available at https://professional.heart.org/ statements by selecting the “Guidelines & Statements” button. To purchase additional reprints, call 215-356-2721 or email  Meredith.Edelman@wolterskluwer.com. The expert peer review of AHA-commissioned documents (eg, scientific statements, clinical practice guidelines, systematic reviews)  is conducted by the AHA Office of Science Operations. For more on AHA statements and guidelines development, visit https:// professional.heart.org/statements. Select the “Guidelines & Statements” drop-down menu near the top of the webpage, then click  “Publication Development.” Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, enhancement, and distribution of this document are not permitted without  the express permission of the American Heart Association. Instructions for obtaining permission are located at https://www.heart.org/ permissions. A link to the “Copyright Permissions Request Form” appears in the second paragraph (https://www.heart.org/en/aboutus/statements-and-policies/copyright-request-form). Developed in Collaboration With and Endorsed by the American College of Clinical Pharmacy and the Heart Rhythm Society  HHS Public Access Author manuscript Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Published in final edited form as: Circulation. 2024 January 02; 149(1): e1–e156. doi:10.1161/CIR.0000000000001193. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

2023 ACC/AHA/ACCP/HRS Guideline for the Diagnosis and  Management of Atrial Fibrillation: A Report of the American  College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint  Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines Writing Committee Members * José A. Joglar, MD, FACC, FAHA, FHRS [Chair], Mina K. Chung, MD, FACC, FAHA, FHRS [Vice Chair], Anastasia L. Armbruster, PharmD, FACC†, Emelia J. Benjamin, MD, ScM, FACC, FAHA, Janice Y. Chyou, MD, FACC, FAHA, FHRS, Edmond M. Cronin, MB, BCh, BAO, FHRS, Anita Deswal, MD, MPH, FACC, FAHA†, Lee L. Eckhardt, MD, MS, FHRS, Zachary D. Goldberger, MD, FACC, FAHA, FHRS, Rakesh Gopinathannair, MD, MA, FACC, FAHA, FHRS, Bulent Gorenek, MD, FACC, Paul L. Hess, MD, MHS‡, Mark Hlatky, MD, FACC, FAHA, Gail Hogan§, Chinwe Ibeh, MD, Julia H. Indik, MD, PhD, FACC, FAHA, FHRS, Kazuhiko Kido, PharmD, PhD, MS, FCCP‖, Fred Kusumoto, MD, FACC, FAHA, FHRS, Mark S. Link, MD, FACC, FAHA, FHRS, Kathleen T. Linta§, Gregory M. Marcus, MD, MAS, FACC, FAHA, FHRS, Patrick M. McCarthy, MD, FACC, Nimesh Patel, MD, Kristen K. Patton, MD, FACC, FAHA, FHRS, Marco V. Perez, MD, FAHA, Jonathan P. Piccini, MD, MHS, FACC, FAHA, FHRS, Andrea M. Russo, MD, FACC, FAHA, FHRS¶, Prashanthan Sanders, MBBS, PhD, FAHA, FHRS, Megan M. Streur, PhD, MN, ARNP, Kevin L. Thomas, MD, FACC, FHRS, Sabrina Times, DHSC, MPH#, James E. Tisdale, PharmD, FACC, FAHA, FCCP, et al. Page 2 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Anne Marie Valente, MD, FACC, FAHA**, David R. Van Wagoner, PhD, FAHA, FHRS †ACC/AHA Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines liaison. ‡ACC/AHA Joint Committee on Performance Measures liaison. §Lay stakeholder representative. ‖American College of Clinical Pharmacy representative. ¶Heart Rhythm Society representative. #Joint ACC/AHA staff representative. **ACC/AHA Joint Committee on Clinical Data Standards liaison. Abstract AIM: The “2023 ACC/AHA/ACCP/HRS Guideline for the Diagnosis and Management of Atrial  Fibrillation” provides recommendations to guide clinicians in the treatment of patients with atrial  fibrillation. METHODS: A comprehensive literature search was conducted from May 12, 2022, to November  3, 2022, encompassing studies, reviews, and other evidence conducted on human subjects  that were published in English from PubMed, EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, the Agency  for Healthcare Research and Quality, and other selected databases relevant to this guideline.  Additional relevant studies, published through November 2022, during the guideline writing  process, were also considered by the writing committee and added to the evidence tables, where  appropriate. STRUCTURE: Atrial fibrillation is the most sustained common arrhythmia, and its incidence and  prevalence are increasing in the United States and globally. Recommendations from the “2014  AHA/ACC/HRS Guideline for the Management of Patients With Atrial Fibrillation” and the “2019  AHA/ACC/HRS Focused Update of the 2014 AHA/ACC/HRS Guideline for the Management of  Patients With Atrial Fibrillation” have been updated with new evidence to guide clinicians. In  addition, new recommendations addressing atrial fibrillation and thromboembolic risk assessment,  anticoagulation, left atrial appendage occlusion, atrial fibrillation catheter or surgical ablation, and  risk factor modification and atrial fibrillation prevention have been developed. Keywords AHA Scientific Statements; acute coronary syndrome; alcohol; anticoagulants; anticoagulation  agents; antiplatelet agents; apixaban; atrial fibrillation; atrial flutter; cardioversion; catheter  ablation; coronary artery disease; coronary heart disease; dabigatran; edoxaban; exercise; heart  failure; hypertension; idarucizumab; left atrial appendage occlusion; myocardial infarction;  obesity; percutaneous coronary intervention; pulmonary vein isolation; risk factors; rivaroxaban;  sleep apnea; stents; stroke; surgical ablation; thromboembolism; warfarin et al. Page 3 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

PREAMBLE Since 1980, the American College of Cardiology (ACC) and American Heart Association  (AHA) have translated scientific evidence into clinical practice guidelines with  recommendations to improve cardiovascular health. These guidelines, which are based on  systematic methods to evaluate and classify evidence, provide a foundation for the delivery  of quality cardiovascular care. The ACC and AHA sponsor the development and publication  of clinical practice guidelines without commercial support, and members volunteer their  time to the writing and review efforts. Guidelines are the official policy of the ACC and  AHA. For some guidelines, the ACC and AHA collaborate with other organizations. Intended Use Clinical practice guidelines provide recommendations applicable to patients with or at risk  of developing cardiovascular disease. The focus is on medical practice in the United States,  but these guidelines are relevant to patients throughout the world. Although guidelines may  be used to inform regulatory or payer decisions, the intent is to improve quality of care and  align with patients’ interests. Guidelines are intended to define practices meeting the needs  of patients in most, but not all, circumstances and should not replace clinical judgment. Clinical Implementation Management, in accordance with guideline recommendations, is effective only when  followed by both practitioners and patients. Adherence to recommendations can be enhanced  by shared decision-making between clinicians and patients, with patient engagement in  selecting interventions on the basis of individual values, preferences, and associated  conditions and comorbidities. Methodology and Modernization The ACC/AHA Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines (Joint Committee)  continuously reviews, updates, and modifies guideline methodology on the basis of  published standards from organizations, including the Institute of Medicine,1,2 and on  the basis of internal reevaluation. Similarly, presentation and delivery of guidelines are  reevaluated and modified in response to evolving technologies and other factors to optimally  facilitate dissemination of information to health care professionals at the point of care. Numerous modifications to the guidelines have been implemented to make them shorter and  enhance “user friendliness.” Guidelines are written and presented in a modular, “knowledge  chunk” format, in which each chunk includes a table of recommendations, a brief synopsis,  recommendation-specific supportive text and, when appropriate, flow diagrams or additional  tables. Hyperlinked references are provided for each modular knowledge chunk to facilitate  quick access and review. In recognition of the importance of cost–value considerations, in certain guidelines, when  appropriate and feasible, an analysis of value for a drug, device, or intervention may be  performed in accordance with the ACC/AHA methodology.3 et al. Page 4 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

To ensure that guideline recommendations remain current, new data will be reviewed on  an ongoing basis by the writing committee and staff. Going forward, targeted sections/ knowledge chunks will be revised dynamically after publication and timely peer review  of potentially practice-changing science. The previous designations of “full revision” and  “focused update” will be phased out. For additional information and policies on guideline  development, readers may consult the ACC/AHA guideline methodology manual4 and other  methodology articles.5–7 Selection of Writing Committee Members The Joint Committee strives to ensure that the guideline writing committee contains  requisite content expertise and is representative of the broader cardiovascular community  by selection of experts across a spectrum of backgrounds, representing different geographic  regions, sexes, races, ethnicities, intellectual perspectives/biases, and clinical practice  settings. Organizations and professional societies with related interests and expertise are  invited to participate as partners or collaborators. Relationships With Industry and Other Entities The ACC and AHA have rigorous policies and methods to ensure that documents are  developed without bias or improper influence. The complete policy on relationships with  industry and other entities (RWI) can be found online. Appendix 1 of the guideline lists  writing committee members’ comprehensive and relevant RWI; for the purposes of full  transparency, comprehensive and relevant disclosure information for the Joint Committee is  also available online. Evidence Review and Evidence Review Committees In developing recommendations, the writing committee uses evidence-based methodologies  that are based on all available data.4,5 Literature searches focus on randomized controlled  trials (RCTs) but also include registries, nonrandomized comparative and descriptive studies,  case series, cohort studies, systematic reviews, and expert opinion. Only key references are  cited. An independent evidence review committee is commissioned when there are ≥1 questions  deemed of utmost clinical importance and merit formal systematic review to determine  which patients are most likely to benefit from a drug, device, or treatment strategy, and  to what degree. Criteria for commissioning an evidence review committee and formal  systematic review include absence of a current authoritative systematic review, feasibility  of defining the benefit and risk in a time frame consistent with the writing of a guideline,  relevance to a substantial number of patients, and likelihood that the findings can be  translated into actionable recommendations. Evidence review committee members may  include methodologists, epidemiologists, clinicians, and biostatisticians. Recommendations  developed by the writing committee on the basis of the systematic review are marked “SR”. Guideline-Directed Management and Therapy The term guideline-directed management and therapy (GDMT) encompasses clinical  evaluation, diagnostic testing, and both pharmacological and procedural treatments.  et al. Page 5 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

For these and all recommended drug treatment regimens, the reader should confirm  dosage with product insert material and evaluate for contraindications and interactions.  Recommendations are limited to drugs, devices, and treatments approved for clinical use in  the United States. Joshua A. Beckman, MD, MS, FAHA, FACC Chair, ACC/AHA Joint Committee on Clinical  Practice Guidelines 1. INTRODUCTION 1.1. Methodology and Evidence Review The recommendations listed in this guideline are, whenever possible, evidence based.  An initial extensive evidence review, which included literature derived from research  involving human subjects, published in English, and indexed in MEDLINE (through  PubMed), EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, the Agency for Healthcare Research and  Quality, and other selected databases relevant to this guideline, was conducted from  May 2022 to November 2022. Key search words included but were not limited to the  following: atrial fibrillation; pregnancy; heart defects, congenital; smoking; cardiomyopathy,  hypertrophic; alcohol; caffeine; sleep; diet; fitness; obesity; anticoagulants; diabetes; rhythm  monitoring; heart failure; genetics; heart valve diseases; rate control; catheter ablation; social  determinants of health; chronic kidney disease; sinus rhythm; chronic coronary syndromes;  left atrial appendage occlusion; left atrial appendage exclusion; cardiac surgical procedures;  amiodarone; electrical cardioversion; thromboembolism; rhythm control; Wolff-ParkinsonWhite syndrome. Additional relevant studies, published through November 2022 during  the guideline writing process, were also considered by the writing committee and added  to the evidence tables when appropriate. The final evidence tables are included in the  Online Data Supplement and summarize the evidence used by the writing committee to  formulate recommendations. References selected and published in the present document are  representative and not all-inclusive. 1.2. Organization of the Writing Committee The writing committee consisted of cardiologists, cardiac electrophysiologists, surgeons,  pharmacists, and patient representatives/lay stakeholders. The writing committee included  representatives from the ACC and AHA, ACCP, and HRS. Appendix 1 of the current  document lists writing committee members’ comprehensive and relevant RWI. 1.3. Document Review and Approval The Joint Committee appointed a peer review committee to review the document. The  peer review committee comprised individuals nominated by the ACC, AHA, and the  collaborating organizations. Reviewers’ RWI information was distributed to the writing  committee and is published in this document (Appendix 2). This document was approved for publication by the governing bodies of the ACC and the  AHA and was endorsed by ACCP and HRS. et al. Page 6 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

1.4. Scope of the Guideline In developing the “2023 ACC/AHA/ACCP/HRS Guideline for the Diagnosis and  Management of Atrial Fibrillation” (2023 atrial fibrillation guideline), the writing committee  reviewed previously published guidelines. Table 1 contains a list of these publications  deemed pertinent to this writing effort and is intended for use as a resource, thus obviating  the need to repeat existing guideline recommendations. 1.5. Class of Recommendations and Level of Evidence The Class of Recommendation (COR) indicates the strength of recommendation and  encompasses the estimated magnitude and certainty of benefit in proportion to risk. The  Level of Evidence (LOE) rates the quality of scientific evidence supporting the intervention  on the basis of the type, quantity, and consistency of data from clinical trials and other  sources (Table 2). 2. BACKGROUND AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY 2.1. Epidemiology Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most sustained common arrhythmia, and its incidence and  prevalence are increasing in the United States and globally (Figures 1 to 3).1,2 The  increasing burden is multifactorial; causes include the aging of the population, rising  tide of obesity, increasing detection, and increasing survival with AF and other forms of  cardiovascular disease (CVD). The estimated global prevalence was 50 million in 2020.2,3  Although the prevalence of undiagnosed AF in the community is unknown, using backcalculation methodology, investigators have estimated that, in 2015, about 11% (591 000  cases) of the >5.6 million AF cases in the United States were undiagnosed.4 AF is associated with higher health care utilization and costs.2 Using US data from Optum  (an administrative claims database for commercially insured [United Healthcare] patients  in the United States), compared with patients without AF, patients with incident AF had  an increased risk of inpatient visits and more cardiovascular-related emergency department  visits (relative risk [RR], 2.41 [95% CI, 2.35–2.47]).5 AF is costly. Examining Optum data,  individuals with AF have annual health care costs of $63 031, which is $27 896 more  than individuals without AF.5 Investigators examining public and private health insurer data  estimated that in US dollars in 2016, AF accounted for $28.4 billion (95% CI, $24.6 billion– $33.8 billion) in health care spending.6 2.1.1. Prevalence, Incidence, Morbidity, and Mortality— AF prevalence in the  United States was estimated to be 5.2 million in 2010, with an expectation to rise to 12.1  million in 2030.1 Corresponding estimates for US incidence was 1.2 million cases in 2010,  with an expectation to rise to 2.6 million cases in 2030.1 The rate of AF diagnosis varies  by education, income,2 clinical,3,4 and genetic3 factors. Overall lifetime risk is about 30% to  40% in White individuals,2–4 about 20% in African American individuals,2 and about 15%  in Chinese5 individuals. et al. Page 7 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

AF is associated with a 1.5- to 2-fold increased risk of death6,7; studies suggest that the  mortality risk may be higher in women than in men.6 In meta-analyses, AF is also associated  with increased risk of multiple adverse outcomes, including a 2.4-fold risk of stroke,7  1.5-fold risk of cognitive impairment or dementia,8 1.5-fold risk of myocardial infarction  (MI),9 2-fold risk of sudden cardiac death,10 5-fold risk of heart failure (HF),7 1.6-fold risk  of chronic kidney disease (CKD),7 and 1.3-fold risk of peripheral artery disease (PAD).7 In  Medicare beneficiaries, the most frequent outcome in the 5 years after AF diagnosis was  death (19.5% at 1 year; 48.8% at 5 years)11; the next most common diagnosis was HF  (13.7%), followed by new-onset stroke (7.1%), gastrointestinal hemorrhage (5.7%), and MI  (3.9%).11 2.1.2. Risk Factors and Associated Heart Disease— In Table 3, we present the  evidence for the most widely reported and validated factors for AF from single studies,  meta-analyses, and Mendelian randomization studies. Risk factors include demographic,  anthropometric, and cardiovascular risk factors, CVD, noncardiac conditions, biomarkers  (eg, electrocardiographic, imaging, circulating), and genetic markers.1 Models predicting  risk of AF onset are presented in Section 4.1 (“Risk Stratification and Population  Screening”). Most studies of AF risk factors and outcomes have been reported from highincome countries and in individuals of European ancestry. 2.2. Atrial Arrhythmia Classification and Definitions 2.2.1. AF Classification— The previous classification of AF, which was based only  on arrhythmia duration, although useful, tended to emphasize AF once it was diagnosed  and focused mainly on therapeutic interventions. The new proposed classification using  stages aims to correct the deficiencies of the previous classification by recognizing AF as a  progressive disease that requires different strategies at the different stages, from prevention  to screening, to rate and rhythm control therapies. The different stages better define AF as  a progressive disease and highlight the need to address it at the earliest stages, especially  emphasizing the importance of prevention, risk factor management, and timing for screening  in those patients at the highest risk. The stages are not mutually exclusive (eg, risk factors  should be managed through multiple stages) (Figure 4). AF is the most common arrhythmia in the world and accounts for significant morbidity and  mortality. Over the past decade, evidence has consistently shown that the best treatment  of atrial fibrillation requires multiple stakeholders committed to providing comprehensive  patient-centered care. In addition, as emphasized in this guideline, AF should be thought of  in a more holistic sense over an individual patient’s lifetime. The foundation of optimal AF management is the treatment of risk factors and implementing  lifestyle changes to decrease the likelihood of developing AF (Figure 5). Once AF develops,  patient care should focus on assessing the risk of stroke and implementing any necessary  treatment, continued optimization of all modifiable risk factors, and managing potential  symptoms of AF, with an initial focus on evaluating and minimizing AF burden. However,  as outlined in this guideline, access to all aspects of health care to all patients is necessary  for any true improvement to be realized. et al. Page 8 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

When AF develops, holistic and optimal care of the patient at risk for AF, or who has  developed AF, can be simply modeled using a building. The foundation of care is treatment  of comorbidities and risk factors and implementing behavioral change in all individuals to  decrease the likelihood of developing AF and reducing its burden (Screening for all risk  factors from HEAD 2 TOES). Once AF develops, there are 3 important care processes  that must be specifically addressed with all patients and aligned with their goals of therapy:  Stroke risk assessment and treatment, if appropriate, Optimizing all modifiable risk factors,  and Symptom management using rate- and rhythm-control strategies that consider AF  burden in the context of an individual patient’s needs (SOS). The overarching principle  for AF management is Access to All Aspects of care to All (4 As). 2.2.2. Associated Arrhythmias— Other atrial arrhythmias are often encountered in  patients with AF. Atrial Tachycardia (AT):  It is a regular atrial rhythm at a constant rate of >100 beats per  minute (bpm) with discrete P waves and atrial activation sequences originating outside of  the sinus node.1 The mechanism can be automaticity, triggered activity, or a microreentry  circuit. Focal ATs arise from a single discrete site within the left or right atrium, in contrast  to macroreentrant atrial arrhythmias and AF, which involve multiple sites or larger circuits.  In multifocal AT, the atrial activation sequence and P-wave morphology vary. Atrial Flutter (AFL) and Macroreentrant AT:  They occur in many of the same  situations as AF. Typical AFL, also known as “typical AFL” or “cavotricuspid isthmus  (CTI)-dependent AFL,”2 involves a macroreentrant circuit around the tricuspid annulus  traversing the CTI on the right side of the heart (Figure 6). This is the arrhythmia associated  with the classic electrocardiogram (ECG) finding of sawtooth flutter waves in the inferior  leads when the circuit goes in the counterclockwise direction. The same circuit in the  clockwise direction is called “reverse typical AFL.” If the flutter involves a different circuit  than tricuspid valve/isthmus, then it is called “atypical” AFL, which is also known as  “noncavotricuspid isthmus–dependent macroreentrant AT.”2 AFL was previously classified  as either type I or type II. That terminology is no longer used. 2.3. Mechanisms and Pathophysiology AF is a chaotic, rapid (300–500 bpm), and irregular atrial rhythm. Although normal rhythms  are conducted through the atria in smooth waves initiated by the sinoatrial node, AF is the  result of either electrophysiological abnormalities that underlie impulse generation and/or  structural abnormalities of cellular connections that typically facilitate rapid and uniform  impulse conduction. AF often stems from waves of electrical activity originating from  ectopic action potentials most commonly generated in the pulmonary veins (PVs) of the left  atrium (LA),1 or in response to reentrant activity promoted by heterogeneous conduction  due to interstitial fibrosis.2 Atrial ectopy can generate runs of tachycardia, while persistent  AF requires a substrate that is either sufficiently large or conduction that is sufficiently  heterogeneous to enable reentrant activity to persist. The electrical abnormalities evident on  the ECG during AF likely represent a shared phenotype of a condition with many distinct  etiologies (genetic, environmental, and metabolic) (Figure 7). et al. Page 9 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

2.3.1. Electrophysiological Mechanisms and Electrical Remodeling— The  observation by Haissaguerre et al1 that ectopic firing from PVs triggers AF revolutionized  treatments for AF. PV features that increase vulnerability for initiating ectopy include  a higher resting membrane potential, stretch-activated channels,2 and pattern of cross  myofiber orientation. Electrical remodeling, which can contribute to and result from AF, includes perturbations  that culminate in abnormal Ca2+ handling and shortened, proarrhythmic triangulated action  potentials (eg, from decreased L-type Ca2+ current3 and increase in IK1).4 Heterogeneity  in IK1 between left and right atria further promotes arrhythmogenicity.5 Downregulation of  connexin results in decreased gap junctions, leading to slow heterogeneous atrial conduction  velocity and repolarization,6 promoting regional functional conduction block that can  support reentry. Connexin remodeling can be due to genetic7 or acquired factors, such as  inflammatory state,8,9 older age, or sleep-disordered breathing (SDB).10 Calcium mishandling from remodeling increases calcium load in the sarcoplasmic reticulum  and dysfunction of ryanodine receptors, which regulate intracellular calcium release.  Remodeling in AF of sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase underlies sequestration of  intracellular calcium between beats, and/or altered regulation of sarcoplasmic reticulum  calcium ATPase by phospholamban and sarcolipin.11 Increased intracellular sodium from  calcium-calmodulin II-induced increased late sodium current or cardiac glycosides can  also increase sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium through the sodium-calcium exchanger.12,13  Several upstream mechanisms (eg, oxidative stress, inflammatory signaling) promote  calcium-calmodulin II-activation. CaMKII-mediated and hyperphosphorylation of ryanodine  receptor 2 promotes spontaneous diastolic Ca2+ leak by increasing ryanodine receptor 2  channel open probability, leading to higher intracellular Ca2+ levels and the milieu for  delayed afterdepolarizations, the most likely trigger for AF initiation.14 Electrogenic action  of sodium-calcium exchanger drives afterdepolarizations, and expression of sodium-calcium  exchanger is increased in HF and AF. Action potential alternans related to Ca2+ mishandling  can be noted to precede AF onset and increases with age. 2.3.1.1. Triggers of AF: The atria of patients with AF tend to have both shorter effective  refractory periods and slower conduction, which enhances dispersion of repolarization  and favor reentry. This substrate is sensitive to AF initiation, frequently after premature  atrial contractions (PACs).1 PAC burden is associated with development of AF.2 Larger  LA volume, increased NT-proBNP levels, and impaired LA emptying are associated with  increased PAC burden.3 In a study of 100 patients undergoing PV isolation, PACs induced  41 episodes of AF in 22 patients, with most episodes originating in the PVs.4 Earlier studies  also reported an LA gradient of background potassium currents, resulting in shorter LA  than right atrial effective refractory period in patients with AF.5 Mapping studies of AF  electrograms in canine models documented a left-right gradient of high frequency sources  (drivers), with the highest frequency regions located near the PVs in the LA.6 2.3.2. Atrial Structural Abnormalities, Remodeling, and Atrial Myopathy— Atrial cardiomyopathy has been identified as “any complex of structural, architectural,  contractile or electrophysiological changes affecting the atria with the potential to produce  et al. Page 10 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

clinically relevant manifestations.”1 Atrial cardiomyopathy is common, associated with  aging and other comorbidities with metabolic or hemodynamic stress, and often leads to or  results from AF. Structural and electrical remodeling promote AF and include interstitial  changes, increased myofibroblast activity, and collagen deposition, fibrofatty deposits,  altered ion channel expression, calcium signaling and contractility, and inflammatory  infiltrates.1 Myeloperoxidase, an oxidase in neutrophils and macrophages, is associated  with fibroblast activation, interstitial fibrosis, and inducibility of AF in a mouse model.2  Prothrombotic changes are often evident in the LA, including increased endocardial  expression of von Willebrand factor, vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 and monocyte  chemoattractant protein-1 changes, which may increase risk of thrombus formation and  stroke.1 Experimental hemodynamic overload, such as reversible aortopulmonary artery shunting  promotes atrial dilation, atrial myocyte hypertrophy, interstitial fibrosis, alterations in  extracellular matrix composition and vascular dysfunction, and increased vulnerability  to atrial ectopy and AF inducibility.3 Electrical remodeling similar to that seen during  AF is observed, with characteristic loss of calcium currents. Shunt closure reverses  electrophysiological changes.3 Clinically, the hemodynamic structural changes are difficult  or impossible to reverse. 2.3.2.1. Upstream Pathways: Upstream pathways include inflammatory, oxidative stress,  fibrosis, calcium handling, genetic, metabolic, obesity, and other mechanisms implicated in  increasing susceptibility to or progression of AF. The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system  (RAAS), oxidative stress, inflammatory signaling, and calcium overload are discussed  here and in Section 2.3.1 (“Electrophysiological Mechanisms and Electrical Remodeling”).  Upstream therapies are discussed in Section 8.3.4 (“Upstream Therapy”). The RAAS regulates blood pressure (BP) and is activated in hypertension and obesity.  RAAS activation promotes vascular smooth muscle constriction (increasing BP), activates  fibroblasts (increasing atrial interstitial collagen), and increases reactive oxygen species  in the sympathetic nervous system. BP and weight control, including treatment with  angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin-II receptor blockers,  attenuate pathologic changes. Oxidative stress is associated with: (1) activation of calcium-dependent calmodulin kinase  II1,2 and jun kinase 2,3 which promotes ryanodine receptor phosphorylation and leads  to spontaneous calcium release4; (2) increased late sodium current, INa,L, and lower  calcium current amplitude; (3) formation of reactive lipid products (isolevuglandins) in  hypertension5 and AF6; (4) activation of the redox-sensitive transcription factor nuclear  factor-kappa B and the NLRP3 inflammasome7; (5) increase in mitochondrial and metabolic  stress; (6) inflammatory changes; and (7) myofilament protein degradation, impairing atrial  contractility, which may increase thromboembolism risk.8 Systemic inflammatory activation, first documented with AF after cardiac surgery,9 has also  been associated with nonsurgical AF.10 NLRP3 knockdown prevented AF inducibility in  et al. Page 11 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

a mouse model, implicating the NLRP3 inflammasome in AF pathophysiology.11 NLRP3blocking drugs are in development. 2.3.2.2. Persistence of AF: In general, persistence of AF reflects the substrate for AF. A  suitable substrate for AF has a wavelength (wavelength = refractory period × conduction  velocity) that is shorter than the dimensions of the tissue, with heterogenous conduction  velocity and/or repolarization duration. Thus, an individual with large, fibrotic, and/or  fatty atria is more likely to have persistent AF than one with a normal-sized atria with  little interstitial fibrosis or adipose infiltration. Electrophysiologic remodeling is typically a  response to persistent AF rather than the trigger. 2.3.3. Role of the Autonomic Nervous System— The autonomic nervous system  (ANS) has an important role as trigger and substrate (Figure 8). ANS triggers AF: The ANS as AF trigger is detailed in several reviews.1–6  Sympathetic efferent stimulation releases noradrenaline, stimulating G-coupled β-adrenergic  receptors, enhancing L-type calcium channels, and increasing inward current (automaticity/ early afterdepolarization). Delayed afterdepolarization occurs via calcium overload and  ryanodine-2 receptor dysfunction. Parasympathetic stimulation shortens atrial effective  refractory period by increasing IKACh (acetyl-choline receptor mediated inward rectifying  potassium channel) activity. Atrial effective refractory period heterogeneity follows the  pattern of autonomic innervation. Sympathetic and parasympathetic activity, alone or  combined, can trigger AF. ANS maintains AF: Atrial sympathetic and parasympathetic hyperinnervation and spatial  heterogeneity, coupled with electrical fractionation and altered atrial electrophysiology,  contribute to substrate.7–10 Modifiable AF risk factors promote ANS dysfunction.3 AF  produces autonomic afferent reflex deficiencies elicited by decreased cardiac volume11,12  and increases sympathetic activity.13 Afferent abnormalities disrupt blood volume and  pressure homeostasis. Similar abnormalities to AF were identified in HF.14 Afferent  ANS dysfunction could link autonomic with anatomic remodeling (atrial dilatation15),  contributing to AF self-perpetuation. 2.4. Genetics Both common forms and familial AF are heritable.1–3 Multiple recent genome-wide  association studies have documented >100 loci specific for AF.4,5 Numerous AF loci  appear consistent across multiethnic groups,5 with some population variation.6,7 With large  genome-wide genotyped cohorts such as the UK Biobank and the US National Heart,  Lung, and Blood Institute’s (NHLBI’s) Trans Omics for Precision Medicine, the genetic  architecture of AF is now emerging. A UK Biobank study identified TTN loss of function  variants in 0.44% of participants, 14% of whom had AF.8 In a Trans Omics for Precision  Medicine study of nearly 1300 participants <66 years of age with AF, 10.1% harbored  a disease-associated genetic variant in genes associated with inherited cardiomyopathy or  arrhythmia syndromes (most common were TTN, MYH7, MYH6, LMNA, and KCNQ1),  and 62.8% had variants of undetermined significance. Disease-associated variants were more  et al. Page 12 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

prevalent at younger age of AF onset, 16.8% in those <30 years.9 A smaller study of persons  of Hispanic or African American descent reported 7% of persons with AF onset at ≤66  years of age harbored rare likely pathogenic or pathogenic sequence variants, mostly in  myocardial structural proteins and ion channels.10 2.5. Addressing Health Inequities and Barriers to AF Management Recommendation to Address Health Inequities and Barriers to AF Management Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendation 1 B-NR 1. Patients with AF, regardless of sex1 and gender diversity, race and ethnicity,2 or adverse social  determinants of health (SDOH),3,4* should be equitably offered guideline-directed stroke risk  reduction therapies as well as rate or rhythm control strategies and LRFM as indicated to improve  quality of life (QOL) and prevent adverse outcomes. *Including lower income, lower education, inadequate or lack of insurance coverage, or rurality.3–5 Synopsis—Inequities in AF care and outcomes in individuals who are women, from  underrepresented racial and ethnic groups (UREGs),2 or who have adverse SDOH have  been documented.3,4 Sex differences in AF treatment have been described with respect to  anticoagulation6,7 and rhythm control therapy approaches.7–9 Racial and ethnic differences  in clinical presentation, management, and prognosis, including stroke, HF, and death, in  patients with AF are widely reported.2,10 To avoid guidelines having the unintended consequence of widening inequities in clinical  care and outcomes in individuals with AF, it is essential to longitudinally measure the receipt  of AF GDMT and outcomes at the clinical practice and health system levels stratified by  specific populations who have historically experienced inequitable care. If inequities are  identified, barriers to GDMT should be eliminated. Data are needed to assess the impact of  addressing SDOH in patients with AF on process measures, health care utilization, costs,  and clinical outcomes.11 In other health contexts, there are observational and randomized  data12 that screening and addressing SDOH leads to improved medication adherence,13 risk  factor control,14 and clinical outcomes.15 Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. Despite the elevated risk of stroke in women and several UREGs, many are  less likely to be treated with stroke risk reduction therapies.6,7 Although women  and individuals from UREGs with AF are more symptomatic and report worse  QOL than their counterparts, they also are less likely to be referred to an  electrophysiologist7 and receive catheter ablation.2,7–9,16 Women are referred for  ablation later in the disease course and at older ages than men.7,17,18 These  differences or delays in therapy may result in worse outcome given early  rhythm control of AF improves outcomes1,19 in select patients. In addition,  in the Catheter Ablation versus Antiarrhythmic Drugs in AF trial, individuals  from UREGs treated with catheter ablation had a 72% relative reduction  in the all-cause mortality rate.20 Therefore, ensuring timely and equitable  et al. Page 13 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

referral of women, individuals from UREG, and those with adverse SDOH  for rhythm control therapy is important. In patients with AF, indicators of  lower socioeconomic status were associated with lower oral anticoagulation  rates,21 lower rate of adherence during direct oral anticoagulant (DOAC)  initiation,22 specialty care,21,23 and less use of cardioversion4,21 and catheter  ablation.4,21,24 Indicators of socioeconomic disadvantages, such as increased risk  of hospitalization,25 stroke,4,21 HF,4,21,26 and death, were also associated with  complications in patients with AF.4,21,27 3. SHARED DECISION-MAKING (SDM) IN AF MANAGEMENT Recommendation for SDM in AF Management Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendation 2b B-R 1. In patients with AF, the use of evidence-based decision aids might be useful to guide stroke  reduction therapy treatment decisions throughout the disease course to improve engagement,  decisional quality, and patient satisfaction.1–4 Synopsis There are wide variations in how SDM is implemented in clinical care settings.5,6 Decision  aids may provide standardization of SDM approaches for better informing patients about  stroke reduction therapies and improve patient-reported measures but to date have not  consistently been developed with recommended frameworks, have rarely been tested in  systemically disadvantaged populations (low health literacy, UREGs, low socioeconomic  status, rural geography, older adults), and have had variable impact on adherence and clinical  outcomes.1–8 Ongoing work will measure health and digital literacy and strengthen the  evidence for the impact of decision aids on decisional quality, adherence to treatment, and  health outcomes.9 Symptom severity strongly correlates with QOL; thus, minimizing symptoms is an essential  component of patient-centered AF management decisions. Rhythm control strategies  improve QOL, particularly when maintenance of sinus rhythm or low AF burden is  achieved.10 Notably, few SDM decision aids are focused on rate or rhythm control treatment  options, and few have measured QOL as an outcome.3,5 Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. Recently, 2 comprehensive reviews of decision aids for stroke reduction therapies  were conducted to determine the impact of these tools on patient-reported  measures of decisional quality, while considering other important outcomes  including oral anticoagulant (OAC) uptake, medication adherence, and the  effect on bleeding and stroke.3,4 Most decision aids focused on patient-reported  measures, and few underwent rigorous pilot testing or correlated the aid with  clinical outcomes, such as stroke and bleeding. Decision aids consistently  demonstrate improvements in patient knowledge. The pooled analysis by Song  et al. Page 14 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

et al noted lower decisional conflict using decision aids and enhanced OAC  uptake (risk ratio, 1.03 [95% CI, 1.01–1.05]).4 Decision aids have historically  shown marginal improvement in 3-month measures of adherence, and the 2  largest randomized trials to date showed no improvement in adherence between  decision aids and usual care at 1 year.1,2 There is a paucity of data on the  impact of decision aids on stroke, thromboembolic events, or bleeding, and when  assessed the benefit has been minimal or neutral.4,11 Despite the US Centers  for Medicaid & Medicare Services coverage decision requirement for SDM for  percutaneous left atrial appendage occlusion (LAAO), only 1 tool was identified  that incorporated this option (Table 5).5 4. CLINICAL EVALUATION 4.1. Risk Stratification and Population Screening There are >20 risk prediction models for incident AF in the community.1 The most widely  replicated risk prediction model for newly diagnosed AF is CHARGE-AF (Cohorts for  Heart and Aging Research in Genomic Epidemiology model for atrial fibrillation; Table  6),2 while the C2HEST score (coronary artery disease or chronic obstructive pulmonary  disease [1 point each]; hypertension [1 point]; elderly [age ≥75 years, 2 points]; systolic HF  [2 points]; thyroid disease [hyperthyroidism, 1 point]) was derived and validated in Asian  cohorts (Table 7).3,4 Screening for AF has been investigated, mostly in patients >65 years of age, using various  protocols that include both 1-time electrocardiographic recordings, recurring intermittent  ECGs (including consumer-based devices), or continuous electrocardiographic external  monitors. Most screening trials have shown higher AF detection using intermittent or  continuous electrocardiographic recordings5 and higher AF detection in patients with higher  predicted risk for AF.6 A recent study also showed that an AI algorithm able to risk-stratify  a relatively uniform population (eg, older adults at risk for stroke) to detect undiagnosed AF  during short-term cardiac monitoring was associated with increased AF.7 Conversely, mass  population screening with a smartwatch app only rarely detected a new diagnosis of AF.8  Ultimately, for risk stratification models and screening programs to be useful, they would  need to improve outcomes and be cost-effective.9 It is not yet established that patients at  high risk of developing AF by a validated risk score benefit from screening and interventions  to improve rates of ischemic stroke, systemic embolism, and survival. 4.2. Basic Evaluation 4.2.1. Basic Clinical Evaluation Recommendations for Basic Clinical Evaluation Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 B-NR 1. In patients with newly diagnosed AF, a transthoracic echocardiogram1–4 to assess cardiac  structure, laboratory testing to include a complete blood count, metabolic panel, and thyroid  et al. Page 15 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

COR LOE Recommendations function,5–7 and when clinical suspicion exists, targeted testing to assess for other medical  conditions associated with AF are recommended to determine stroke and bleeding risk factors,  as well as underlying conditions that will guide further management. 3: No  benefit B-NR 2. In patients with newly diagnosed AF, protocolized testing for ischemia, acute coronary  syndrome (ACS), and pulmonary embolism (PE) should not routinely be performed to assess  the etiology of AF unless there are additional signs or symptoms to indicate those disorders.8–10 Synopsis: The initial clinical evaluation of the patient with newly diagnosed or suspected  AF should be focused on confirming the diagnosis and identifying relevant clinical  factors that will impact management. A targeted history and physical examination  should be performed at the initial assessment and repeated during periodic follow-up,  especially given the evolving risk of thromboembolism and the cadence of symptoms  in response to therapy (see Section 11, “Future Research Needs”). An ECG can assess  other electrical abnormalities, including possible substrates such as Wolff-Parkinson-White  (WPW) syndrome, coexisting atrial arrhythmias, as well as abnormalities that may affect  decision-making in pharmacological management (eg, bradycardia, QT duration). Basic  laboratory tests should be performed to determine if other clinically relevant disorders  are present and impact on management, particularly with respect to stroke and bleeding  risk. A transthoracic echocardiogram provides information on chamber size, thickness,  function, and the presence of valvular pathology. Additional testing, including multimodality  advanced imaging and further ambulatory electrocardiographic monitoring, may be pursued  based on the results of these initial evaluations. AF itself does not increase the likelihood  of myocardial ischemia, ACS or PE, and therefore routine testing for these disorders in the  absence of signs or symptoms is of no benefit. Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. A transthoracic echocardiogram is essential to evaluate chamber size and  function, valve function, and right ventricular (RV) pressure. Left ventricular  ejection fraction (LVEF) impacts decisions for antiarrhythmic drug therapy  and whether to prioritize other rhythm control therapies, including catheter  ablation. Additionally, strain imaging may suggest an underlying infiltrative  cardiomyopathy, such as amyloidosis.1 Echocardiography also provides  information on LA size and function. Altered LA compliance is known to  be associated with AF11 and progression toward persistent-type AF.2 In a  meta-analysis, AF recurrence after ablation was associated with a lower LA  strain,3 while LA volume was a stronger predictor of recurrence after ablation  than the characterization of AF as paroxysmal or persistent.4 Laboratory  testing can detect other medical conditions that are associated with AF and  would impact therapeutic decision-making, such as CKD,5 liver dysfunction,6  and hyperthyroidism.7,12 Laboratory testing may also reveal electrolyte  abnormalities, including from medications such as diuretics. Laboratory testing  is also needed to determine stroke risk and bleeding risk factors, which will  guide management decisions. When clinical suspicion exists, additional testing  et al. Page 16 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

might be needed to evaluate for potentially related conditions, such as significant  valvular disease. 2. The presence of AF itself should not prompt routine protocolized testing  for myocardial ischemia, ACS, or PE, in the absence of signs or symptoms  to suggest those diseases. A retrospective analysis of asymptomatic patients  with AF compared with age- and sex-matched controls that were referred for  myocardial stress imaging found no difference in mean summed stress score  or rate of abnormal studies.8 A retrospective analysis of 1700 asymptomatic  AF patients (no chest pain or dyspnea) found that 4.6% had >5% ischemic  myocardium, and the yield to detect ischemia that resulted in revascularization  was only 0.4%.9 Among patients suspected of PE, a retrospective analysis  showed that the presence of AF did not increase the probability of PE.10  Certainly, this would not preclude from evaluating patients with signs and/or  symptoms of ischemia and PE. 4.2.2. Rhythm Monitoring Tools and Methods Recommendations for Rhythm Monitoring Tools and Methods Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 B-NR 1. Among individuals without a known history of AF, it is recommended that an initial AF diagnosis  be made by a clinician using visual interpretation of the electrocardiographic signals, regardless of  the type of rhythm or monitoring device.1–5 1 B-NR 2. In patients with an intracardiac rhythm device capable of a diagnosis of AF, such as from an atrial  pacemaker lead, a diagnosis of AF should only be made after it is visually confirmed by reviewing  intracardiac tracings to exclude signal artifacts and other arrhythmias.6–9 2a B-R 3. For patients who have had a systemic thromboembolic event without a known history of AF and in  whom maximum sensitivity to detect AF is sought, an implantable cardiac monitor is reasonable.10,11 2a B-NR 4. Among patients with a diagnosis of AF, it is reasonable to infer AF frequency, duration,  and burden using automated algorithms available from electrocardiographic monitors, implantable  cardiac monitors, and cardiac rhythm devices with an atrial lead, recognizing that periodic review  can be required to exclude other arrythmias.1,4,5,12 2a B-R 5. Among patients with AF in whom cardiac monitoring is advised, it is reasonable to recommend  use of a consumer-accessible electrocardiographic device that provides a high-quality tracing to  detect recurrences.13 Synopsis: Monitoring options for AF include a standard 12-lead ECG, continuously  recording or loop-recording electrocardiographic monitors using separate electrodes or as  patches, implantable cardiac monitors (sometimes referred to as implantable loop recorders),  cardiac rhythm management devices with an atrial lead (eg, pacemakers and defibrillators),  handheld ECGs, and smartwatches. Photoplethysmography has been used to infer AF from  irregular pulse patterns using a variety of devices, predominately smartphone cameras14  and smartwatches.15–18 Electrocardiographic monitors often deploy automated algorithms  for AF detection, but due to variable accuracy,1–5 the initial diagnosis should rely on  a health care professional’s examination of the electrocardiographic tracing. Although  photoplethysmography monitors may alert individuals to obtain an electrocardiographic  tracing, it is not sufficiently reliable to establish an AF diagnosis.14–18 AF detected from an  et al. Page 17 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

atrial lead has been validated versus surface ECGs6,7 and independently predicts stroke.8,9  RCTs have demonstrated that implantable cardiac monitors exhibit the highest sensitivity  in detecting AF compared with external ambulatory monitors, likely related to the longer  duration of monitoring.10,11 Automated algorithms to analyze electrocardiographic devices  have generally been found to be sufficiently reliable to infer the frequency, duration, and  burden of AF among those with an AF diagnosis.1,4,5,12 A randomized trial showed that a  handheld electrocardiographic monitor resulted in earlier detection of recurrent AF.13 Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. Although automated algorithms in various devices are generally reliable, health  care professional overread of electrocardiographic tracings remains necessary  given the imperfect test characteristics of those algorithms.1–5 Similarly, while  algorithms utilizing photoplethysmography signals (derived using smartphones  or smartwatches) to infer irregular heart rates can discriminate AF from normal  sinus rhythm, these are not sufficiently reliable to establish an AF diagnosis.14–18 2. Cardiac rhythm devices with an atrial lead have been shown to detect  AF validated against conventional surface electrocardiographic tracings.6–8 In  addition, both the presence and duration of AF detected solely by these  devices predict stroke in a manner that would be expected of AF.8,9 It is still  essential that the intracardiac tracings are reviewed for confirmation because  false-positives are possible. The duration of AF that mandates intervention with  anticoagulation will be discussed in Section 6.4.1 (“Oral Anticoagulation for  Device-Detected Atrial High-Rate Episodes Among Patients Without a Previous  Diagnosis of AF”). 3. The more frequent and longer monitoring for AF is deployed, the greater  the sensitivity in detecting AF.10,19 Randomized trials, predominately among  cryptogenic stroke patients, have revealed that implantable cardiac monitors  exhibit the highest sensitivity in detecting AF in view of extended monitoring  periods compared with external monitors.10,11 4. It is often not feasible to manually review all electrocardiographic strips from  various monitoring devices, either due to inaccessibility or time and resource  constraints on health care professionals. Although variability in accuracy across  different devices may be present, the validity demonstrated in automated  algorithms is generally sufficient to infer frequency, duration, and burden of  AF using electrocardiographic devices such as continuously wearable monitors,  implantable cardiac monitors, and cardiac rhythm devices with an atrial  lead.1,4,5,12 5. Cardiac monitoring may be advised to AF patients for various reasons, such  as for detecting recurrences, screening, or response to therapy. Among patients  with AF who are undergoing cardioversion or AF ablation, a single-center,  randomized trial demonstrated that use of a self-administered handheld ECG  resulted in earlier detection of recurrent AF13 and possibly improvement in  survey-determined AF-related QOL20 compared with usual care. et al. Page 18 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

5. LIFESTYLE AND RISK FACTOR MODIFICATION (LRFM) FOR AF  MANAGEMENT 5.1. Primary Prevention Recommendation for Primary Prevention Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendation 1 B-NR 1. Patients at increased risk of AF should receive comprehensive guideline-directed LRFM for AF,  targeting obesity,1 physical inactivity,2 unhealthy alcohol consumption,3 smoking,4 diabetes,5 and  hypertension.6 Synopsis—The clinical, family history, and genetic risk factors for AF are well established  (Table 3), and risk prediction models (Section 4.1, “Risk Stratification and Population  Screening”) for AF have been reported and replicated.7–9 Multiple reports have established  that maintenance of optimal risk factors and ideal cardiovascular health are associated with  substantially reduced risk of AF10,11 onset and complications (Section 5, “Lifestyle and  Risk Factor Modification [LRFM] for AF Management”). To reduce risk of AF onset,  individuals in the general population, particularly those at increased risk of AF, should  receive comprehensive integrated LRFM, including maintenance of ideal weight and weight  loss if overweight or obese1,12; pursue a physically active lifestyle,2 particularly if sedentary;  receive smoking cessation counseling and/or medications4; moderate (≤1 standard alcoholic  drink/day) or abstain from alcohol and avoidance of binge drinking3; control diabetes5; and  control BP in accordance with GDMT.6,13 There is also an association of cannabis, cocaine,  methamphetamine, or opiate use with increased incidence of AF.14 Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. Most cardiovascular risk factors are associated with increased risk of newonset AF. Observational studies have demonstrated that obesity and physical  inactivity each independently increase the risk of newly diagnosed AF.1,2,12,15– 20 However, caution should be considered in pursuing years of regular, highvolume (≥3 h/day) high-intensity endurance training given observational data  linking it with increased AF risk21–23 in men and similar “J” curve risk  curve observed for high or vigorous activity in both men and women in  another study.24 Alcohol consumption enhances the risk of AF in a fairly  linear fashion, with clear evidence that binge drinking heightens the risk.3,25–29  Uncertainty persists regarding harms or benefits of no more than 1 regular drink  per day.28,29 Self-reported,4 biomarker-verified,30 and genetically predicted31  smoking is associated with increased risk, and smoking cessation is associated  with decreased risk of incident AF.4 The presence of either type 1 or type  2 diabetes increases AF risk,5,32 with evidence that worse glucose control  correlates with a higher probability of developing AF.33 Hypertension is the risk  factor with the highest attributable risk for AF10; intensive BP control lowers the  et al. Page 19 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

risk of incident AF in observational and randomized data.6 Effective strategies to  manage risk factors and prevent CVD have been reported elsewhere.12,13 5.2. Secondary Prevention: Management of Comorbidities and Risk Factors 5.2.1. Weight Loss in Individuals Who Are Overweight or Obese Recommendation for Weight Loss in Individuals Who Are Overweight or Obese Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendation 1 B-R 1. In patients with AF who are overweight or obese (with body mass index [BMI] >27 kg/m2),  weight loss is recommended, with an ideal target of at least 10% weight loss to reduce AF symptoms,  burden, recurrence, and progression to persistent AF.1–4 Synopsis: Obesity is associated with the development and progression of AF.5 It results in  direct changes to the atrial myocardium forming the substrate for AF.6–8 In addition, obesity  is also associated with several comorbidities that have been independently associated with  the development of AF.9,10 Obesity has a significant adverse impact on attempts to maintain  sinus rhythm, with each 5-unit increase in BMI being associated with a 10% and 13%  greater risk of postoperative and postablation AF, respectively.5,11,12 Management of weight  is important in the prevention and treatment of AF. Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. In an RCT in overweight and obese individuals with BMI >27 kg/m2 and  AF, weight loss, as part of a comprehensive LRFM program, was associated  with reduction in arrhythmia symptoms, recurrence, and burden.1 Observational  studies demonstrated graded responses commensurate with the degree of weight  loss, with achievement of at least 10% weight loss associated with greater  maintenance of sinus rhythm,2 improved ablation outcomes,3 and reversal of AF  type.4 In observational studies, bariatric surgery in Class III obese individuals  (BMI ≥40 kg/m2) with AF was associated with improved sinus rhythm  maintenance after catheter ablation13,14 and reversal of AF type.15 The greater  number of risk factors managed associated with likelihood of maintaining sinus  rhythm.16 However, a small observational study in individuals with obesity (BMI  ≥30 kg/m2) with long-lasting persistent AF observed no difference in symptoms  or sinus rhythm maintenance despite significant weight loss, suggesting that  there may be extreme substrates in which a weight loss strategy may not be  effective.17 Structured programs with regular review of progress facilitate achievement of weight loss  and appear essential, as demonstrated by inability to reduce AF burden in a small RCT that  achieved only 4.5% weight loss in the intervention arm. et al. Page 20 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

5.2.2. Physical Fitness Recommendation for Physical Fitness Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendation 1 B-R 1. In individuals with AF,* moderate-to-vigorous exercise training to a target of 210 minutes per week  is recommended to reduce AF symptoms1–3 and burden,2,3 increase maintenance of sinus rhythm,3–5  increase functional capacity, and improve QOL.3,5,6 *In patients without AF related to excessive exercise training. Synopsis: Randomized trials provide evidence that prescribed aerobic exercise interventions  may reduce arrhythmia burden in those with nonpermanent AF2 and improve functional  capacity and health-related QOL in both permanent1,6 and nonpermanent AF.2 In the  ACTIVE-AF (An Exercise and Physical Activity Program in Patients With Atrial  Fibrillation) study, an exercise intervention combining home and supervised aerobic exercise  over 6 months resulted in greater freedom from arrhythmia recurrence, reduced burden, and  improved QOL.3 Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. In patients with nonpermanent AF, aerobic exercise training may contribute  to a reduction in AF burden and improve maintenance of sinus rhythm.2– 5 Aerobic exercise interventions reduce severity of AF symptoms, increase  functional capacity, and improve health-related QOL among patients with both  nonpermanent and permanent AF.1,3,6 Initiation of or continuing regular exercise  after development of AF was associated with a lower risk of HF and mortality  in a population-based cohort study.7 Exercise training should be moderate- to  vigorous-intensity aerobic exercise, with a target of 210 minutes per week, and  should be prescribed to reduce the frequency and duration of AF episodes,  while improving cardiorespiratory fitness and symptom severity.3 Exercise  prescription may be further modified to patient comorbidities, such as obesity,  hypertension, and diabetes.4 Caution should be applied to ensure adequate  ventricular rate control during exercise training and absence of atrial myopathy  related to excessive exercise training. To date, there is little evidence that highintensity aerobic exercise may be favorable over moderate-intensity activities,8  and extreme levels of exercise have been associated with higher incidence of  AF.9,10 Exercise training may be delivered as a stand-alone intervention or as  a component of multidisciplinary cardiac rehabilitation. Exercise-based cardiac  rehabilitation improves QOL and functional capacity among patients with AF  undergoing ablation,11,12 although available studies have not been adequately  powered to assess AF-specific outcomes, such as arrhythmia recurrence.13 There  is mixed evidence for a reduction in hospitalization or all-cause mortality with  exercise training or exercise-based cardiac rehabilitation.12,14,15 et al. Page 21 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

5.2.3. Smoking Cessation Recommendation for Smoking Cessation Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendation 1 B-NR 1. Patients with a history of AF who smoke cigarettes should be strongly advised to quit smoking  and should receive GDMT for tobacco cessation1,2 to mitigate increased risks of AF-related  cardiovascular complications and other adverse outcomes.3–6 Synopsis: Observational data support that cigarette smoking in individuals with AF is  associated with worse cardiovascular outcomes and death and that individuals with AF  who quit smoking are less likely to develop stroke or die. Despite the benefits of smoking  cessation, individuals with AF are less likely to receive smoking cessation management  than counterparts without AF.7,8 Patients with AF should be strongly advised to quit  cigarette smoking9 and should receive GDMT for tobacco cessation, including behavioral  interventions10,11 and pharmacotherapy.2 Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text: 1. In individuals with AF, cigarette  smoking was associated with poorer outcomes. For individuals who have undergone AF  catheter ablation, current cigarette smoking was associated with increased risk for AF  recurrence.12,13 Cigarette smoking was associated with less time in therapeutic range for  patients on warfarin.14 Although some heterogeneity exists, the preponderance of studies  have reported that individuals with AF who smoked cigarettes had increased risks of  stroke,3,4 HF,5 hospitalization,6 and death.6,15 Of concern, studies have reported that  individuals with AF (versus those without) were less likely to receive smoking cessation  interventions.7,8 Observational studies suggest that compared with current smokers,  individuals with AF who quit smoking after AF diagnosis were less likely to experience  CVD,3 stroke,3,16 and all-cause mortality.16 5.2.4. Alcohol Consumption Recommendation for Alcohol Consumption Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendation 1 B-R 1. Patients with AF seeking a rhythm-control strategy should minimize or eliminate alcohol  consumption to reduce AF recurrence and burden.1–3 Synopsis: Among patients with a diagnosis of AF, randomized trials have demonstrated a  reduction in AF burden on assignment to abstinence,1 that alcohol acutely changes human  electrophysiology in a fashion that renders the atria more prone to fibrillate,2 and suggest  that avoiding alcohol can reduce the risk of a near-term AF event.3 et al. Page 22 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. Among patients with AF, a case-crossover study revealed a higher risk of a  discrete AF episode hours after objectively confirmed alcohol consumption.4 In  the context of a structured comprehensive management of risk factors, alcohol  abstinence1 or reduction to ≤3 standard drinks per week has been demonstrated  to reduce AF symptoms,5 AF burden,6,7 and progression of AF from paroxysmal  to persistent.8 5.2.5. Caffeine Consumption Recommendation for Caffeine Consumption Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendation 3: No Benefit B-NR 1. For patients with AF, recommending caffeine abstention to prevent AF episodes is of no  benefit, although it may reduce symptoms in patients who report caffeine triggers or worsens  AF symptoms.1–9 Synopsis: A randomized N-of-1 trial,2 as well as longitudinal, observational studies, have  generally found that caffeine consumed within normal limits is either associated with no  heightened risk3–6 or a reduced risk of incident AF.3,5,7–9 Patients often report caffeine as a  trigger of AF,10 although this has not been supported by objective data. Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. A randomized trial of caffeine failed to show any difference in postoperative AF  risk,1 and paroxysmal AF patients experienced no detectable difference in AF  episodes when exposing themselves to versus avoiding caffeine in randomized  N-of-1 trials.2 Longitudinal, observational studies have generally found that  caffeine consumed in usual amounts is either associated with no heightened  risk3–6 or a reduced risk of incident AF.3,5,7–9Also, Mendelian randomization  studies examining caffeine metabolism-related genetic variants as instrumentalvariable surrogates of caffeine consumption have not shown either a harmful or  protective effect related to incident AF.8,11 Several case reports have described  a relationship between excessive consumption of caffeine (involving overdoses  or highly caffeinated energy drinks)12,13 and AF in young, healthy individuals.  Individuals should not begin or increase their caffeine consumption with the  intent of reducing their AF risk. Patients often report that caffeine triggers  their AF,10,14 although this has neither been supported by nor extensively  studied in an objective manner. Current studies cannot exclude the possibility  of individual-level idiosyncratic relationships between caffeine and AF. It is also  possible that caffeine exacerbates symptoms of AF, or causes similar symptoms  of palpitations, or enhances heart rhythm awareness. 5.2.6. Diet and Dietary Supplementation— Promoting a healthy diet is an effective  strategy for prevention of cardiovascular disease. The evidence pertaining to the prevention  et al. Page 23 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

of AF using dietary supplements is inconsistent, complicated by substantial misclassification  and difficulties controlling for potential confounding factors associated with dietary  interventions. Several studies have evaluated the role of omega-3 fatty acids and AF, demonstrating an  inverse relationship between plasma omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid levels and prevalent  AF.1,2 However, with supplementation there has been no effect or a potential for greater  AF.3–7 Although vitamin D supplementation is not useful on a population basis,8,9 its use in  the perioperative period in deficient individuals reduces AF.10 Similarly, ascorbic acid has  been beneficial in reducing postoperative AF in some studies, although not uniformly.11 The importance of weight management on AF symptoms, burden, and recurrence is  increasingly recognized,12,13 leading to various dietary interventions. Although evidence  on diets is still evolving, analyses of the ARIC (Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities) study  caution using low-carbohydrate diets, which were found to increase the risk of incident AF,  regardless of the type of protein or fat used to replace carbohydrate.14 5.2.7. Diabetes— AF and diabetes are associated with increased risk of cardiovascular  mortality and sudden death.1 In patients with diabetes, vascular mortality was lower in  patients treated with DOACs compared with warfarin.2 In patients with AF and diabetes  undergoing catheter ablation, optimal glycemic control preablation may lessen the risk of  AF recurrence postablation.3 5.2.8. Treatment of Hypertension Recommendation for the Treatment of Hypertension Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendation 1 B-NR 1. For patients with AF and hypertension, optimal BP control is recommended to reduce AF  recurrence and AF-related cardiovascular events.1–7 Synopsis: Renal denervation and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (MRAs) have  been associated with decreased AF burden in clinical trials.1,2 The only randomized trial  singularly targeting BP control as a mechanism to reduce the recurrence of AF8 showed  no significant difference in the primary outcome of recurrent symptomatic atrial arrhythmia  beyond 3 months’ postablation among the 2 groups. However, clinical trials of integrated  comprehensive LRFM programs in conjunction with rhythm control therapies for AF have  resulted in longer arrhythmia-free survival and decreased AF burden.3,5,9 Among patients  with AF, treating elevated BP to guideline-directed goals reduces major cardiovascular  events.9 Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. In patients with AF, treatment of hypertension should aim for current BP  guidelines to reduce stroke, bleeding, and other adverse outcomes.5,10 An RCT  of patients with paroxysmal AF and hypertension noted fewer recurrences among  et al. Page 24 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

participants treated with renal denervation and pulmonary vein isolation (PVI)  compared with PVI alone.2 Randomized studies of mineralocorticoid receptor  antagonists for hypertension have been shown to reduce AF burden, and ACE  inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers have been associated with lower  AF incidence in secondary analyses of RCTs (see Section 8.3.4, “Upstream  Therapy”). In addition, several integrated LRFM programs that have resulted in  a decrease in BP have been associated with a decreased recurrence of AF.3,11The  SMAC (Substrate Modification With Aggressive Blood Pressure Control) AF  trial randomized hypertensive patients scheduled for AF ablation to standard  or aggressive BP treatment with a systolic BP target of 120 or 140 mm Hg.8  No significant difference was shown in recurrent symptomatic atrial arrhythmia  beyond 3 months postablation (median follow-up, 14 months), and this is the  only RCT to date singularly targeting BP control as a mechanism to reduce  AF recurrence.8 Post hoc analyses of DOAC clinical trials to reduce the risk  of stroke in patients with AF have consistently found lower rates of stroke in  patients with controlled BP.6,7 5.2.9. Sleep Recommendation for Sleep Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendation 2b B-NR 1. Among patients with AF, it may be reasonable to screen for obstructive sleep apnea, given its high  prevalence in patients with AF, although the role of treatment of sleep-disordered breathing (SDB) to  maintain sinus rhythm is uncertain.1–13 Synopsis: SDB is a risk factor for the development of incident AF, and more severe SDB  acutely increases the risk of a discrete AF episode.14–18 Independent of SDB, poor sleep  quality is associated with an increased risk of developing incident AF.19–21 When formal  testing for SDB is used, the disease is frequently observed in >20% of patients with an  AF diagnosis.1–5 Observational studies suggest that treatment of SDB may reduce the risk  of AF recurrence and AF burden, but RCTs have not been adequately powered to reveal a  relationship between treating SDB and reduced AF.6–13 Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. The prevalence of SDB is remarkably and consistently high in patients with AF  (generally substantially >20% and sometimes >50% regardless of the type of  AF population assessed), is often undetected, and, as conventional symptoms  of SDB may be absent, may require formal study to establish a diagnosis of  SDB.1–5,11 Multiple observational studies have described fewer recurrences of  AF and a reduction in AF burden, including after cardioversion and catheter  ablation procedures, among those undergoing treatment for SDB compared  with those not treated for their SDB.6–11,22 However, small trials randomizing  patients with AF and SDB treatment versus usual care have not shown significant  et al. Page 25 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

differences in AF burden or AF recurrence, including after cardioversion or  PVI ablation,12,13,22 although studies tended to exclude patients who might  benefit most from SDB treatment (eg, those who had more symptomatic sleep  apnea [Epworth Sleepiness Scale score >10 or 15], severe cardiovascular disease  [LVEF <40% or 45%], or severe obesity). 5.2.10. Comprehensive Care Recommendations for Comprehensive Care Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 A 1. Patients with AF should receive comprehensive care addressing guideline-directed LRFM, AF  symptoms, risk of stroke, and other associated medical conditions to reduce AF burden, progression,  or consequences.1–3 2a B-R 2. In patients with AF, use of clinical care pathways, such as nurse-led AF clinics, is reasonable to  promote comprehensive, team-based care and to enhance adherence to evidence-based therapies for  AF and associated conditions.4–6 Synopsis: Almost all patients with AF have multiple conditions that either increase AF risk  or are exacerbated by AF. Patients with AF are also at risk of developing thromboembolism,  stroke, and HF, so a comprehensive approach tailored to the needs of the individual patient  should improve outcomes. Randomized trials have shown that interventions aimed at AF risk  factors, such as alcohol use, overweight, and HF, reduce AF burden. Clinical care pathways  and algorithms for AF management, including LRFM, have shown promise in randomized  trials through coordinating care and facilitating comprehensive AF management. Although comprehensive care of the multiple conditions associated with AF is logical, it  is unclear whether integrated care by a multidisciplinary team leads to better outcomes  than comprehensive care by a single clinician applying an evidence-based AF clinical care  algorithm or pathway. Nevertheless, coordination of care among multiple clinicians should  also improve care, even though it has not been evaluated rigorously.7 Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. Randomized trials have shown the efficacy of many individual components  of patient-centered care for AF, as discussed earlier in this section. Several  randomized and nonrandomized studies have utilized comprehensive programs  for patients with AF.2,8,9 The RACE 3 (Rate Control versus Electrical  cardioversion for persistent atrial fibrillation) trial3 found that multifaceted  treatment for patients with AF and early HF (with mineralocorticoid receptor  antagonists, statins, ACE inhibitors and/or angiotensin receptor blockers [ARBs],  and cardiac rehabilitation) improved maintenance of sinus rhythm. 2. Various clinical care pathways, algorithms, and electronic clinical decision  support systems for the care of patients with AF have been tested in  clinical trials, with mixed results. Care provided by specialty nurses using  a clinical support system aimed at enhancing adherence to guideline-directed  et al. Page 26 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

therapies improved cardiovascular outcomes in a single center study4 but  not in the subsequent multicenter RACE 4 trial, where results were  associated with experience of the center, although adherence to guideline-based  recommendations was still greatly improved.10 In a cluster randomized trial  of elderly patients with AF where integrated care intervention consisting of  (a) quarterly AF check-ups by trained nurses in primary care, also focusing  on comorbidities, (b) monitoring of anticoagulation therapy in primary care,  and finally (c) easy-access availability of consultations from cardiologists and  anticoagulation clinics, the patients assigned to integrated care experienced  a 45% reduction in all-cause mortality when compared with usual care.11  In another study (SAFETY [Standard versus Atrial Fibrillation specific  management study]), a posthospital discharge management program specific to  AF was associated with proportionately more days alive and out of hospital  but not prolonged event-free survival relative to standard management.12 On  the other hand, data on technology-based clinical decision support systems  are mixed, with a reduction in stroke and thromboembolism in the mAFApp 2 (Mobile Health Technology for Improved Screening and Optimized  Integrated Care in Atrial Fibrillation) trial5 and improved anticoagulation use  in the CDS-AF (clinical decision support tool for stroke prevention) trial,6 but  no significant effect on primary outcomes in 3 other randomized trials.13–15  Educational interventions for both providers and patients can improve use of  anticoagulation.16 6. PREVENTION OF THROMBOEMBOLISM 6.1. Risk Stratification Schemes Recommendations for Risk Stratification Schemes Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 B-NR 1. Patients with AF should be evaluated for their annual risk of thromboembolic events using a  validated clinical risk score, such as CHA2DS2-V ASc.1–4 1 B-NR 2. Patients with AF should be evaluated for factors that specifically indicate a higher risk of  bleeding, such as previous bleeding and use of drugs that increase bleeding risk, in order to  identify possible inteiventions to prevent bleeding on anticoagulation.5–7 2a C-LD 3. Patients with AF at intermediate annual risk of thromboembolic events by risk scores (eg,  equivalent to CHA2DS2-V ASc score of 1 in men or 2 in women), who remain uncertain about  the benefit of anticoagulation, can benefit from consideration of factors that might modify their  risk of stroke to help inform the decision.* 3: No  Benefit B-NR 4. In patients who are deemed at high risk for stroke, bleeding risk scores should not be used  in isolation to determine eligibility for oral anticoagulation but instead to identify and modify  bleeding risk factors and to inform medical decision-making.8–10 *Factors may include AF burden or other features in Table 3. Synopsis—Patients with AF have an increased risk of stroke that varies widely among  individuals. Several risk scores based on clinical factors have been developed.1–3 Risk  scores should be evaluated using accepted criteria11: their ability to discriminate between  et al. Page 27 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

high- and low-risk individuals (eg, as assessed by the c-index), their accurate calibration  to actual risk levels, and their validation in independent populations. A patient’s absolute  risk of stroke is central to recommendations about anticoagulation and can be characterized  as low (~<1%/y), intermediate (~1 to ~2%/y), and high (~>2%/y). Currently used risk  scores discriminate moderately well between patients at higher and lower risk yet can  greatly overestimate or underestimate absolute risk levels4 in different populations. Current  risk scores may be inaccurate because they omit other factors that alter risk of stroke,  especially characteristics of AF12–14; consequently, risk scores should be calibrated against  the actual annual rates of stroke in the target population to assure an accurate, unbiased risk  prediction. Newer risk scores may modestly improve risk discrimination (c-index) compared  with CHA2DS2-V ASc and may offer potential advantages in specific populations (Table 8).  Online calculators are available for the ATRIA (Anticoagulation and Risk Factors in Atrial  Fibrillation),1 CHA2DS2-V ASc,2 and GARFIELD-AF3 (Global Anticoagulant Registry in  the Field-Atrial Fibrillation) risk scores. Anticoagulation increases the risk of bleeding, so patients with AF are generally evaluated  for bleeding risk as part of SDM about anticoagulation. Currently used bleeding risk  scores—HAS-BLED (hypertension, abnormal renal/liver function, stroke, bleeding history  or predisposition, labile international normalized ratio [INR], elderly [age ≥65 years],  drugs/alcohol concomitantly]),5 HEMORR2HAGES (hepatic or renal disease, ethanol abuse,  malignancy, older age [≥75 years], reduced platelet count or function, re-bleeding risk,  hypertension [uncontrolled], anemia, genetic factors, excessive fall risk, stroke),6 and  ATRIA (anemia, renal disease, elderly [age ≥75 years], any prior bleeding, hypertension)7 —discriminate poorly between patients with and without bleeding15 and include many  nonspecific factors that predict an increased risk of stroke as well as an increased risk of  bleeding (eg, age, hypertension, renal disease, and previous stroke). Assessment of factors  that specifically predict an increased risk of bleeding without predicting an increased risk of  stroke is more helpful when balancing risks and benefits of anticoagulation. Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1.—Several risk scores based on clinical  factors have been developed1–3; in general, risk discrimination is improved by including  more predictors (eg, CHA2DS2-V ASc improved on the original CHADS22 [congestive  heart failure, hypertension, age >75 years, diabetes, stroke/transient ischemia attack/ thromboembolism] by adding additional risk factors and age categories). However, the  absolute risk associated with any particular score level varies widely across populations;  among 15 cohort studies, patients with a CHA2DS2-V ASc score of 2 had annual rates  of stroke that ranged from low to high: <1% in 4 cohorts, 1% to 2% in 6 cohorts, and  >2% in 5 cohorts,4 although higher scores were associated with higher stroke risk in each  cohort (Figure 9). The CHA2DS2-V ASc score is considered the most validated score, most  therapies have used that score to prove efficacy, and thus CHA2DS2-V ASc is generally the  preferred score. Yet, despite its extensive use, CHA2DS2-V ASc has shown suboptimal performance in  selected populations, such as those with renal disease, prompting the creation of other  scores. Newer risk scores, such as the ATRIA1,16,17 and GARFIELD-AF3,18 scores,  modestly improve risk discrimination (c-index) compared with CHA2DS2-V ASc, but their  et al. Page 28 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

calibration and risk reclassification performance has not been as rigorously evaluated. A  recent meta-analysis reported that 19 risk scores, 329 external validations, and 76 risk score  updates have been conducted to predict ischemic stroke in patients with AF.19 Potential  differences of the most studied risk scores are listed in Table 9. Some potential advantages of  other scores, for example, the GARFIELD-AF score, includes mortality and bleeding risk to  facilitate discussion with patients in a more comprehensive way. Also, when uncertainty  exists, a score such as GARFIELD-AF adds additional variables to consider, such as  smoking status, renal disease, and dementia. This guideline does not intend to preclude  the future development of more accurate scores for stratifying patients. 1. Clinical decisions surrounding stroke prevention therapy in patients with AF  must balance the risks of ischemic stroke, the risks of bleeding with treatment,  net clinical benefit, and patient preferences. The most studied bleeding risk  scores (HAS-BLED,5 HEMORR2HAGES,6 and ATRIA7) discriminate poorly  between patients with and without bleeding20 (c-index 0.58 to 0.59 in a  French nationwide study21). These scores are problematic to use in clinical  decision-making because they incorporate several clinical factors that increase  the risks of both stroke and bleeding (eg, age, hypertension, renal disease,  and previous stroke), which makes it difficult to balance the benefits and  risks of anticoagulation because the same risk factors also predict higher  risk of stroke. Consideration of factors that specifically indicate a higher risk  of bleeding without predicting higher risk of stroke (eg, previous bleeding,  anemia, and certain medications) may better inform decision-making about the  balance of benefits and harms expected from anticoagulation. Assessment of risk  factors specific for bleeding may suggest interventions to reduce bleeding risk,  such as discontinuing antiplatelet medications or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory  medications or the use of LAAO devices.10 2. The decision to treat with OACs for stroke prevention in patients with a  CHA2DS2-V ASc of 1 (CHA2DS2-V ASc of 2 in women) may at times require  additional discussion with patients as the strength or recommendation is less  robust (2a), and often patients might be more reluctant. Also, the 1-point-concept  of risk estimation in the subgroup of patients with a CHA2DS2-V ASc score of  1 has shown to be simplistic because the magnitude of risk for each factor is  heterogeneous and because data have shown a wide range of risk depending  on the studied cohort.22 Thus, as part of SDM discussions with patients, other  factors, such as AF burden, can be considered when interpreting a stroke risk  score.12–14,23 Additional factors, such as degree of hypertension control, can also  affect the risk of stroke; in the ARISTOTLE (Apixaban for Reduction in Stroke  and Other Thromboembolic Events in Atrial Fibrillation) trial, a single elevated  BP measurement during the study was associated with a 50% increased risk of  stroke.23,24 Additional patient-specific risk factors, such as certain biomarkers  (eg, proBNP), LA or left atrial appendage (LAA) function and anatomy,  or electrocardiographic features, among others, have been demonstrated to  influence stroke risk, yet it is unclear how to incorporate them into clinical  practice.12 Antithrombotic treatment with DOACs seems to offer a superior netet al. Page 29 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

benefit with regard to prevention of thromboembolic events and the risk of major  bleeding compared with vitamin K antagonists (VKAs). Consideration of these  additional factors may inform decision-making for patients with an intermediate  risk of stroke who remain uncertain on deciding anticoagulation. 3. Unless an absolute contraindication to anticoagulation is present, bleeding risk  scores have limitation in clinical decision-making because the most commonly  used scores (HAS-BLED,5 HEMORR2HAGES,6 and ATRIA7) are based on  several clinical factors that indicate higher risks of both stroke and bleeding, and  patients with higher risk of bleeding also tend to have a higher risk of stroke.  Furthermore, a bleeding risk score cannot be interpreted in isolation because it  does not assess the net clinical benefit of anticoagulation or balance the risk  of bleeding against the risk of stroke. Population-based studies suggest that the  benefits of stroke prevention with oral anticoagulation generally outweigh the  risks of bleeding, even in patients determined to be at high risk for bleeding.8,9  Decision-making about oral anticoagulation should be based on consideration of  both benefits and harms, not by using bleeding risk scores in isolation, and the  best utility of these scores may be identifying potential modifying risk factors.8,9 6.2. Risk-Based Selection of Oral Anticoagulation: Balancing Risks and Benefits Recommendations for Risk-Based Selection of Oral Anticoagulation: Balancing Risks and  Benefits Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 B-R 1. In patients diagnosed with AF who have an estimated annual risk of stroke or thromboembolic  events ≥2%, selection of therapy to reduce the risk of stroke should be based on the risk of  thromboembolism, regardless of whether the AF pattern is paroxysmal, persistent, long-standing  persistent, or permanent.1–3 1 B-NR 2. In patients with AF at risk for stroke, reevaluation of the need for and choice of stroke risk  reduction therapy at periodic intervals is recommended to reassess stroke and bleeding risk, net  clinical benefit, and proper dosing.4,5 Synopsis—Prevention of stroke is important in patients with AF to maximize survival,  health, and QOL. Selection of stroke risk reduction therapy should be guided by the  patient’s risk of stroke, risks of bleeding with therapy, and their individual preferences.  When considering stroke prevention therapy, the risk of stroke should inform the decision  regardless of the pattern of AF (paroxysmal, persistent, long-standing persistent, or  permanent). All decisions regarding stroke prevention therapy should be periodically  reassessed since a patient’s risk, eligibility, and preferences can change over time. Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. Although the risk of stroke and systemic embolism and all-cause mortality  are increased in persons with more persistent forms of AF, selection of stroke  prevention therapy should be based on the risk of stroke and not the pattern of  et al. Page 30 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

AF. Treatment effects with oral anticoagulation are consistent across AF patterns  (paroxysmal, persistent, long-standing persistent, or permanent) in trials of stroke  prevention therapy.1–3 2. AF is a lifelong condition and, thus, patient characteristics, risk factors, and  net clinical benefit can and often will change over time.4 In long-term followup, stroke risk increases due to age and accumulation of other risk factors.6  Physiologic factors that impact stroke prevention therapy also change over time  and can have important implications for proper medication dosing and patient  safety.5 Typically, periodic assessment should be performed once a year but  might need to be performed more frequently in the context of changes in clinical  status, such as reduction in renal function or development of additional risk  factors. 6.3. Oral Anticoagulants Vitamin K Antagonists—Since the 1950s, warfarin was used as a first-line therapy  until DOACs came into practice. A narrow therapeutic window based on international  normalized ratios (INRs), frequent monitoring, more frequent drug interactions (mainly  through CYP2C9), dietary restrictions, and low clinical safety profile affected the routine  use of warfarin in practice. Because of affordability issues of DOACs for some patients with  AF, warfarin is still an appropriate OAC due to its lower cost for patients who cannot afford  DOACs. About 21% of patients with nonvalvular AF were still receiving warfarin, while the  rest received DOACs in the first quarter of 2017.1 Warfarin remains the first-line therapy in  patients with AF and moderate-severe rheumatic mitral stenosis or mechanical heart valves.  Clinical studies show that the target INR is between 2 and 3, and risk of bleeding becomes  mostly apparent when INR exceeds 4. OAC use in special populations will be discussed in  separate sections. Direct oral anticoagulants—DOACs were developed to address the disadvantages of  warfarin and are currently recommended as the first-line therapy over warfarin in patients  with AF (except moderate to severe mitral stenosis or mechanical heart valve recipients)  in this guideline. All 4 pivotal clinical trials comparing individual DOACs (apixaban,  dabigatran, edoxaban, and rivaroxaban) with warfarin showed superiority or noninferiority  to warfarin for the prevention of stroke or systemic embolism in patients with AF except  for moderate to severe mitral stenosis or mechanical heart valve.2–5 They also showed  significantly lower risks of major bleeding in the apixaban, dabigatran 110 mg twice daily  group, and edoxaban 30 mg or 60 mg daily dose groups compared with the warfarin group  or nonsignificant differences in major bleeding between dabigatran 150 mg twice daily  group or the rivaroxaban group and warfarin. All DOAC groups showed significantly lower  risks of intracranial hemorrhage (ICH) compared with warfarin. Gastrointestinal bleeding  risks were significantly higher in the dabigatran 150 mg twice daily, edoxaban 60 mg once  daily, and rivaroxaban groups compared with the warfarin group. However, the apixaban  group did not significantly increase the risk of gastrointestinal bleeding compared with the  warfarin group. et al. Page 31 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

6.3.1. Antithrombotic Therapy Recommendations for Antithrombotic Therapy Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 A 1. For patients with AF and an estimated annual thromboembolic risk of ≥2% per year (eg,  CHA2DS2-V ASc score of ≥2 in men and ≥3 in women), anticoagulation is recommended to  prevent stroke and systemic thromboembolism.1–7 1 A 2. In patients with AF who do not have a history of moderate to severe rheumatic mitral  stenosis or a mechanical heart valve, and who are candidates for anticoagulation, DOACs are  recommended over warfarin to reduce the risk of mortality, stroke, systemic embolism, and  ICH.1–7 2a A 3. For patients with AF and an estimated annual thromboembolic risk of ≥1% but <2% per  year (equivalent to CHA2DS2-V ASc score of 1 in men and 2 in women), anticoagulation is  reasonable to prevent stroke and systemic thromboembolism.1,3 3: Harm B-R 4. In patients with AF who are candidates for anticoagulation and without an indication for  antiplatelet therapy, aspirin either alone or in combination with clopidogrel as an alternative to  anticoagulation is not recommended to reduce stroke risk.8,9 3: No  Benefit B-NR 5. In patients with AF without risk factors for stroke, aspirin monotherapy for prevention of  thromboembolic events is of no benefit.10,11 Synopsis: A high risk for stroke or systemic embolism is about 2% per year, and all the  DOAC trials (Re-LY [Randomized Evaluation of Long-Term Anticoagulation Therapy];  ROCKET AF [Rivaroxaban Once Daily Oral Direct Factor Xa Inhibition Compared with  Vitamin K Antagonism for Prevention of Stroke and Embolism Trial in Atrial Fibrillation];  ARISTOTLE; and ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48 [Effective Anticoagulation with Factor Xa Next  Generation in Atrial Fibrillation – Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction 48]) included  patients with this level of risk.1–4 Patients at intermediate risk (1%-2%/y) can also benefit  from anticoagulation, and the RE-LY1 and ARISTOTLE3 trials included this population.  Stroke risk scores applied to cohorts give different stroke rates, and therefore any score  should be viewed as only an estimate of true risk; in addition some scores used stroke,  while others used thromboembolic events. Nonetheless, it is practical to use a validated  risk score, such as CHA2DS2-V ASc, ATRIA, or GARFIELD-AF. Future research may yield  improved risk scores that refine how to incorporate risk modifiers, such as female sex12 and  other parameters such as AF burden. Anticoagulation has also been shown to be superior to  antiplatelet therapy to reduce stroke risk.8,9 Recommendations for antithrombotic selection  in valvular heart disease (VHD) are provided in Section 6.8.5 (“AF in VHD”) and for AFL  in Section 6.8.6 (Figure 10). Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. Randomized trials published in the 1990s established the superiority of  anticoagulation, at that time limited to warfarin, to reduce stroke.11 Since that  time, management has advanced considerably, and the randomized trials that  compared DOACs with warfarin1–4 are more relevant to current antithrombotic  management. In these trials1–4 and metanalyses,5–7 DOACs were favored for  lower risk of stroke, systemic embolism, and ICH.1–7 These trials reported  the CHADS2 score. The recently studied ATRIA and Swedish cohorts13,14  et al. Page 32 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

reported lower stroke rates, by CHADS2 score, compared with that previously  reported.15 A CHADS2 score of 1 gave a stroke rate of 1.20 in ATRIA14 and  2.4 in a Swedish cohort.13 A CHADS2 score of 2 gave a stroke rate of 2.59  in ATRIA14 and 3.5 in the Swedish cohort.13 Therefore, the stroke risk of  patients in the rivaroxaban2 and edoxaban4 trials was likely >2% given a required  minimum CHADS2 score of 2, and lower in the apixaban3 and dabigatran1  trials that included scores of 0 and 1. A Markov state transition decision  model16 concluded that anticoagulation was preferred for a stroke rate of 1.7%.  Therefore, a stroke and systemic embolism risk threshold of 2% is likely to  yield a benefit that far exceeds risk. In some conditions, such as hypertrophic  cardiomyopathy, the risk of stroke is high enough independent of risk score to  indicate anticoagulation.17 2. In the randomized DOAC trials, all DOACs achieved noninferiority1–4 and in 2  trials (for dabigatran, RE-LY , and for apixaban, ARISTOTLE) were superior to  warfarin. With warfarin, regular assessment of the INR is necessary to maintain  a therapeutic value. In the RCTs, the mean time in therapeutic range was only  55% in ROCKET AF2 and highest at 66% in ARISTOTLE.3 In a meta-analysis,6  DOACs, compared with warfarin, had a relative risk of stroke of 0.81 (95%  CI, 0.73–0.91; P<0.0001), a relative risk of mortality of 0.90 (95% CI, 0.85– 0.95; P=0.0003), relative risk of ICH of 0.48 (95% CI, 0.39–0.59; P<0.0001),  and increased relative risk of bleeding of 1.25 (95% CI, 1.01–1.55; P=0.043).  Although patients with moderate to severe mitral stenosis or mechanical valve  were excluded from DOAC trials (and subsequently shown they may have  worse outcomes with DOACS), other forms of VHD were allowed, such as  aortic stenosis or regurgitation or mitral regurgitation. Bioprosthetic valves  and valve repair were allowed in the edoxaban (ENGAGE AF) and apixaban  (ARISTOTLE) trials, and valve repair in the rivaroxaban (ROCKET AF) trial.  A systematic review18 of patients with VHD (other than mitral stenosis or  mechanical valve) concluded that DOACs were safe. 3. As the DOAC trials1–4 demonstrated improved safety compared with warfarin,  the threshold of using a DOAC might be different than for warfarin.16 A Markov  decision model found the tipping point for warfarin to be at 1.7%/year stroke  risk.16 Considering the improved ICH and mortality risk of DOACs compared  with warfarin in meta-analyses of the DOAC trials,5–7 it is appropriate to  designate a lower stroke risk threshold if a DOAC is utilized. The dabigatran1  and apixaban3 trials included lower risk patients and about one-third of patients  had a CHADS2 score of 0 or 1. This likely corresponds to an estimated annual  stroke risk of about 1%, considering more recent cohorts.13,14 This is further  supported by meta-analyses that showed a consistent benefit of DOACs across a  broad range of vulnerable patients, including as classified by CHADS2 scores.6,7 4. A meta-analysis of AF trials from the 1990s and early 2000s found that while  antiplatelet therapy (APT), most commonly aspirin, reduced stroke and systemic  embolism compared with placebo, APT was inferior to warfarin in patients  with AF.11 Aspirin was studied compared to apixaban in the A VERROES trial  et al. Page 33 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

(Apixaban Versus ASA to Prevent Stroke In AF Patients Who Have Failed or  Are Unsuitable for Vitamin K Antagonist Treatment)9 for patients unsuitable  for VKAs; this trial was stopped early due to the benefit of apixaban over  aspirin to prevent stroke or systemic embolism, while major bleeding was similar  between the 2 arms. The combination of clopidogrel and aspirin was compared  to VKAs in ACTIVEW (Atrial fibrillation Clopidogrel Trial with Irbesartan for  prevention of Vascular Events),8 and this trial was stopped prematurely due  to the superiority of anticoagulation with VKAs to prevent stroke, non–central  nervous system systemic embolus, MI, or vascular death. Unless there is an  indication for antiplatelet therapy, such as coronary artery disease (CAD) or  vascular disease, patients with AF should not be prescribed antiplatelet therapy  to reduce stroke risk. 5. Aspirin therapy was compared with no treatment in patients with low stroke  risk in a multicenter RCT in Japan, the Japan Atrial Fibrillation Stroke Trial.10  This trial was stopped early when an interim analysis showed that aspirin gave  a marginally higher risk of major bleeding and was unlikely to prevent primary  or secondary endpoints. The primary endpoint was noncardiovascular death,  ICH, major bleeding, and peripheral embolization. A meta-analysis of 7 trials  that studied aspirin versus placebo found that aspirin reduced stroke by 19%,  which did not reach statistical significance with a CI that included 0 (−1% to  35%). Four of these were primary prevention trials and showed an absolute risk  reduction with aspirin of 0.8% per year, with a number needed to treat of 125.11  Although aspirin has not been studied in patients without any risk factors for  stroke, patients without stroke risk may derive no benefit from aspirin therapy. In  fact, 1 study that analyzed stroke mechanisms in the SPAF (Stroke Prevention in  Atrial Fibrillation) I-III trials demonstrated that aspirin did not decrease the rate  of cardioembolic stroke and that AF patients at highest risk for stroke are those  with the highest rates of cardioembolic stroke and have the greatest reduction  in stroke with anticoagulants.19 Thus, modest reduction in stroke observed in  some trials may have been related to noncardioembolic stroke in patients with  additional risk factors. 6.3.1.1. Considerations in Managing Anticoagulants Recommendations for Considerations in Managing Anticoagulants Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 C-LD 1. For patients with AF receiving DOACs, optimal management of drug interactions is  recommended for those receiving concomitant therapy with interacting drugs, especially  CYP3A4 and/or p-glycoprotein inhibitors or inducers (Table 13).1–7 1 B-R 2. For patients with AF receiving warfarin,* a target INR between 2 and 3 is recommended, as  well as optimal management of drug-drug interactions, consistency in vitamin K dietary intake,  and routine INR monitoring to improve time in therapeutic range and to minimize risks of  preventable thromboembolism or major bleeding.8–10 et al. Page 34 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

COR LOE Recommendations 3: Harm B-NR 3. For patients with AF, nonevidence-based doses of DOACs should be avoided to minimize risks  of preventable thromboembolism or major bleeding and to improve survival.11,12 *Excludes patients with mechanical valves. Synopsis: Multiple factors need to be considered to select an optimal OAC in patients with  AF. Efficacy, safety, insurance coverage, renal/hepatic function, drug interaction screening,  medication adherence, and patient preferences are the major factors for consideration.  Dosing of DOACs in patients with AF should be selected based on age, renal function,  weight, and concomitant medications. The hepatic function also needs to be evaluated for  the appropriateness of DOACs. Characteristics and dosing of OACs are summarized in  Table 13. Although DOAC drug interactions occur in practice less frequently than with  warfarin, clinically significant drug interactions through CYP3A4 and/or p-glycoprotein  should be carefully evaluated. Strong CYP3A4 and/or p-glycoprotein inhibitors such as  ketoconazole, itraconazole, and ritonavir may significantly increase DOAC plasma levels  and the risk of bleeding, while strong CYP3A4 and/or p-glycoprotein inducers such as  rifampin, phenytoin, phenobarbital, primidone, carbamazepine, or St. John’s wort may lower  DOAC plasma levels and increase the risks of stroke or systemic embolism. The routine  measurement of DOAC plasma concentrations is not indicated in practice due to the lack  of well-established therapeutic ranges in the literature. DOAC levels may be indicated when  clinicians assess DOAC adherence for potentially noncompliant patients, quantify residual  anticoagulation levels before emergency invasive procedures/surgeries, or evaluate the  absorption of DOAC after bariatric surgery. Regular monitoring is recommended to optimize  indications, ensure appropriate dosing, and avoid adverse effects. Suggested laboratory  monitoring is summarized in Figure 11. If warfarin is selected over DOACs, achievement of higher time in therapeutic range (eg,  ≥70%), and thorough consideration of drug-drug interactions, vitamin K food intake advice,  and patient education on adherence to dosing instructions are important to reduce adverse  effects. Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. Rivaroxaban is contraindicated for patients receiving ketoconazole or ritonavir,  because ketoconazole or ritonavir coadministration significantly increased  rivaroxaban plasma levels by 158% or 153%, respectively.1 Apixaban also  requires dose adjustment to 2.5 mg twice daily for patients receiving  apixaban 5 mg twice daily when ketoconazole, itraconazole, or ritonavir is  started.13 Apixaban plasma level was significantly increased by 99% when  ketoconazole was coadministered in healthy subjects.2 The concomitant therapy  of dronedarone or ketoconazole for patients with creatinine clearance (CrCl) 30  to 50 mL/min receiving dabigatran requires dose adjustment to dabigatran 75 mg  twice daily because it produced comparable dabigatran exposure in patients with  CrCl 30 to 50 mL/min receiving the concomitant therapy to patients with CrCl  15 to 29 mL/min receiving only dabigatran.14 A retrospective study revealed  et al. Page 35 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

that the probability of patients with subreference DOAC levels was significantly  higher in patients receiving antiepileptic drugs compared to those not receiving  any CYP3A4 inducers.4 The claim-based retrospective cohort study showed that  CYP-inducing antiepileptic drug use was significantly associated with an 86%  increase in thromboembolic and ischemic adverse events in patients receiving  DOACs.6 A prospective multicenter cohort study corroborated that the patients  receiving concomitant therapy of DOACs and antiepileptic drugs developed a  higher rate of stroke/TIA/systemic embolism (5.7% patient-year).7 2. Warfarin remains the preferred agent in patients with AF receiving CYP3A4/pglycoprotein–inducing agents, or moderate-severe mitral stenosis or mechanical  heart valve. Also, warfarin may be selected over DOACs in patients with AF  due to higher cost or intolerances of DOACs. The optimal INR control, with a  therapeutic INR goal of 2 to 3, needs to be achieved through the appropriate  drug-drug interaction management, vitamin K dietary education, and routine INR  monitoring. A systematic review of 47 studies found that time in therapeutic INR  range showed negative correlation with risks of thromboembolism (R, −0.59;  P=0.01) and major bleeding (R, −0.59; P=0.002).8 An RCT revealed that a  weekly vitamin K dietary modification significantly achieved a therapeutic INR  more frequently than a conventional group (74 versus 58%; P=0.04) at 90 days  after randomization.9 A meta-analysis of 11 RCTs and 61 observational studies  for warfarin drug interactions found that the concomitant use of APT (odds ratio  [OR], 1.74 [95% CI, 1.56–1.94]), nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (OR,  1.83 [95% CI, 1.29–2.59]), selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (OR, 1.62  [95% CI, 1.42–1.85]), or antimicrobial agents (OR, 1.63 [95% CI, 1.45–1.83])  was significantly associated with higher risks of clinically relevant bleeding.10 3. A significant number of patients with nonvalvular AF are receiving DOAC offlabel doses not compliant with labeling.15–18 A meta-analysis of cohort studies  showed that inappropriately lower DOAC doses are significantly associated with  higher stroke or systemic embolism risks compared with the standard labeled  doses (OR, 1.21 [95% CI, 1.02–1.43]; P=0.03), but no significant differences  in bleeding risks were observed (OR, 1.03 [95% CI, 0.92–1.15]; P=0.62).11  Of note, 9 of 16 included studies were performed in Asia, while 4 studies in  the United States, 2 studies in Europe, and 1 worldwide study were included.  Another meta-analysis of observational studies found that inappropriately higher  DOAC doses were significantly associated with higher risks of ischemic stroke/ systemic embolism (hazard ratio [HR], 1.26 [95% CI, 1.11–1.43]; P=0.003) or  major bleeding (HR, 1.30 [95% CI, 1.04–1.62]; P=0.025) compared with the  standard doses.12 In this study, underdosing was also associated with a higher  risk of net clinical outcome (HR, 1.19 [95% CI, 1.04–1.40]; P=0.04) and allcause death (HR, 1.24 [95% CI, 1.04–1.48]; P=0.02). Off-label dosing should be  avoided to optimize the efficacy and safety of DOACs. et al. Page 36 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

6.4. Silent AF and Stroke of Undetermined Cause Recommendation for Silent AF and Stroke of Undetermined Cause Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendation 2a B-R 1. In patients with stroke or TIA of undetermined cause, initial cardiac monitoring and, if needed,  extended monitoring with an implantable loop recorder are reasonable to improve detection of AF.1 Synopsis—Approximately 25% to 30% of ischemic strokes remain cryptogenic after  standard stroke evaluation.2,3 A large proportion of these events are presumed to be  related to occult AF, particularly those of embolic appearance.4,5 APT is the recommended  treatment of choice for patients with cryptogenic stroke, including embolic stroke of  undetermined source.6,7 For patients with AF in general, however, anticoagulation has been  shown to be superior to APT for stroke risk reduction.8 Thus, detection of occult AF after  stroke may have significant therapeutic implications. Randomized trials have shown longer  durations of cardiac monitoring result in higher rates of AF detection after stroke.1,9,10  However, data are limited regarding the effects of extended monitoring on risk reduction of  recurrent stroke or poststroke mortality. For recommendations on anticoagulation and risk  factors, refer to Section 6.4.1 (“Oral Anticoagulants”). Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. Growing evidence supports the use of extended cardiac monitoring for the  identification of occult AF in patients with cryptogenic stroke.11,12 In the  EMBRACE (30 Day Event Monitoring Belt for Recording Atrial Fibrillation  After a Cerebral Ischemic Event) trial, which randomized 572 patients ≥55 years  of age with recent cryptogenic stroke or TIA to either 30-day external loop  recorder or conventional 24-hour Holter monitoring, extended monitoring was  associated with higher rates of AF detection at 90 days.1The CRYSTAL-AF  (Cryptogenic Stroke and Underlying AF) trial randomized 441 patients ≥40  years of age with recent cryptogenic stroke or TIA to cardiac monitoring with  either insertable loop recorder or conventional follow-up ECGs. Implantable  recorder was superior in detecting AF at 6 months (8.9% versus 1.4%), 12  months (12.4% versus 2.0%), and 3 years (30% versus 3%).9 In FIND-AF  (Future Innovations in Novel Detection of Atrial Fibrillation), which compared  repeated sets of 10-day Holter monitoring (at baseline, 3-month, and 6-month  timepoints) to conventional 24-Holter in patients ≥60 years of age with recent  stroke, higher rates of detection were associated with repeated monitoring (14%  versus 5%; absolute difference, 9.0% [95% CI, 3.4–14.5]; P=0.002).10 Finally,  the PER DIEM (Post-Embolic Rhythm Detection with Implantable vs External  Monitoring) RCT also showed a significantly greater proportion of patients  with AF detected at 1 year with prolonged monitoring.13 Additional studies are  needed, however, to determine whether extended cardiac monitoring improves  long-term poststroke outcomes. et al. Page 37 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

6.4.1. Oral Anticoagulation for Device-Detected Atrial High-Rate Episodes  Among Patients Without a Previous Diagnosis of AF Recommendations for Oral Anticoagulation for Device-Detected Atrial High-Rate Episodes  Among Patients Without a Previous Diagnosis of AF Referenced studies that support the  recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 2a B-NR 1. For patients with a device-detected atrial high-rate episode (AHRE) lasting ≥24 hours1  and with a CHA2DS2-V ASc score ≥2 or equivalent stroke risk,2 it is reasonable to initiate  oral anticoagulation3 within a SDM framework that considers episode duration and individual  patient risk. 2b B-NR 2. For patients with a device-detected AHRE lasting between 5 minutes and 24 hours and  with a CHA2DS2-V ASc score ≥3 or equivalent stroke risk,2 it may be reasonable to initiate  anticoagulation within a SDM framework that considers episode duration and individual  patient risk. 3: No  Benefit B-NR 3. Patients with a device-detected AHRE lasting <5 minutes and without another indication for  oral anticoagulation should not receive oral anticoagulation.4,5 Synopsis: AHREs detected by a cardiovascular implantable electronic device are associated  with a stroke risk lower than that of clinical AF6 that varies according to the episode  duration1 and CHA2DS2-V ASc score.2 Clinician confirmation of the duration and nature  of the longest atrial high-rate episode is recommended.1 Episodes lasting ≥24 hours are  associated with a significant risk of stroke or systemic embolism1,7 that may be reduced  with oral anticoagulation.3 By contrast, short episodes, commonly defined as <5 minutes,  are not associated with clinical events.4,5 Patients with episodes of intermediate duration and  with an elevated stroke risk may benefit from oral anticoagulation.2 There is an interaction  between AHRE duration and CHA2DS2-V ASc score,2 suggesting both may be used to guide  oral anticoagulation candidacy (Figure 12). Of note, the threshold for anticoagulation is  higher as in device-detected AF the risk of stroke may be lower than in clinical AF. Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. AHREs lasting ≥24 hours are associated with an elevated risk of stroke that  varies according to CHA2DS2-V ASc score. AHRE burden is most commonly  defined according to the duration of the longest-detected episode, though  cumulative duration has also been examined. In a secondary analysis of the  ASSERT (Atrial Fibrillation Reduction Atrial Pacing Trial), adjudicated AHREs  >24 hours was associated with an increased risk of subsequent stroke or systemic  embolism (adjusted HR, 3.24 [95% CI, 1.51–6.95]; P=0.003).1 Similar findings  are seen in observational studies in which most AHREs were not adjudicated,7  though clinician confirmation is preferred. In an observational study linking  administrative claims data2 to a device database in which continuous rhythm  monitoring data were available but not adjudicated, the risk of stroke among  patents with subclinical AF >23.5 hours and a sex-modified CHA2DS2-V ASc  score ≥2 not taking anticoagulation exceeded 1% per year, a threshold that  may be appropriate for use of non-VKAs, with a still higher stroke risk with  increasing CHA2DS2-V ASc score ≥3.8 In a retrospective cohort study of patients  with subclinical AF >24 hours with an average CHA2DS2-V ASc score of  et al. Page 38 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

4.2±1.4, treatment of subclinical AF >24 hours with OAC was associated with a  reduced stroke risk (HR, 0.28 [95% CI, 0.10–0.81]; P=0.02).2,3 2. Although the risk of stroke among patients with an AHRE of intermediate  duration is lower than that among patients with an AHRE ≥24 hours, the precise  stroke risk is uncertain and may vary according to the CHA2DS2-V ASc score.  In ASSERT, AHREs lasting >6 minutes to 24 hours were not associated with  stroke or systemic embolism compared with patients without AHREs.1 The  CHA2DS2-V ASc score of this subpopulation was 2.2±1.0 (mean±SD). In the  aforementioned study linking administrative claims data to a device database  in which continuous rhythm monitoring data were available, the risk of stroke  and systemic embolism off anticoagulation exceeded 1% among patients with a  sex-modified CHA2DS2-V ASc score of 3 to 4 and exceeded 2% among patients  with a sex-modified CHA2DS2-V ASc score ≥5.2 3. Brief episodes of subclinical AF are at low risk of clinical events. In RATE  (Registry of Atrial Tachycardia and Atrial Fibrillation), patients with clinical  events such as hospitalization, death, or stroke were more likely than those  without to have AHREs with either onset or offset of an adjudicated, single ECG  (31.9% versus 22.1% among patients with pacemakers and 28.7% and 20.2%  among patients with implantable cardioverter-defibrillators [ICDs]).4 AHREs >5  minutes are highly correlated with AF and AFL, whereas shorter episodes often  represent other tachyarrhythmias.9 To remove most episodes of oversensing,  AHREs lasting ≤5 minutes were excluded from analysis of MOST (Mode  Selection Trial).10 A similar threshold was used in several subsequent key studies  to exclude spurious events.1,3,5,11,12 6.5. Nonpharmacological Stroke Prevention Although oral anticoagulation is the standard of care to reduce the risk of ischemic stroke  in patients with AF, it is contraindicated in some patients due to an excess risk of major  bleeding. Surgical and percutaneous techniques to occlude the LAA have been developed  to reduce the risk of ischemic stroke. These techniques have the potential to obviate the  need for or supplement long-term oral anticoagulation in select patients. Surgical LAAO is a  particularly important consideration in patients with AF who undergo cardiac surgery. 6.5.1. Percutaneous Approaches to Occlude the LAA Recommendations for Percutaneous Approaches to Occlude the LAA Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 2a B-NR 1. In patients with AF, a moderate to high risk of stroke (CHA2DS2-V ASc score ≥2), and  a contraindication (Table 14) to long-term oral anticoagulation due to a nonreversible cause,  percutaneous LAAO (pLAAO) is reasonable.1–4 2b B-R 2. In patients with AF and a moderate to high risk of stroke and a high risk of major bleeding  on oral anticoagulation, pLAAO may be a reasonable alternative to oral anticoagulation based on  et al. Page 39 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

COR LOE Recommendations patient preference, with careful consideration of procedural risk and with the understanding that the  evidence for oral anticoagulation is more extensive.1–3,5,6 Synopsis: A large body of evidence supports the use of OACs to reduce the risk of ischemic  stroke in patients with AF; however, OACs may be contraindicated in some patients (Table  14). pLAAO devices are designed to prevent embolization of LAA thrombi and potentially  obviate the need for OAC for stroke risk reduction. RCTs have demonstrated pLAAO to  be noninferior to warfarin and DOACs for stroke and systemic embolism with a reduced  risk of major bleeding.1–4 A prospective nonrandomized study has shown that patients  deemed unsuitable for OAC who undergo pLAAO implant have a lower-than-expected  risk of ischemic stroke.5 Prospective registries of pLAAO device implant in patients who  are not on long-term OAC have shown a high rate of procedural success, a low risk of  major procedure-related complications, and a low rate of ischemic stroke in follow-up.6,7  Based on these findings, pLAAO is reasonable in patients with nonvalvular AF who have  a contraindication to long-term OAC due to a nonreversible cause. Additionally, pLAAO  may be reasonable as an alternative to OAC based on patient preference after careful  consideration of procedural risk and with the understanding that there is a much greater  body of evidence supporting OAC in this population in general. Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. pLAAO has been evaluated in patients with AF and a contraindication to  OAC. The ASAP (ASA Plavix Feasibility Study With Watchman Left Atrial  Appendage Closure Technology) study was a nonrandomized trial evaluating  the performance of the Watchman device in 150 patients with AF who were  deemed ineligible for OAC with warfarin.5 The rate of ischemic stroke was lower  in patients who received the Watchman device than would be expected based  on the CHADS2 scores of the cohort (2.3% versus 7.3%). The EWOLUTION  (Evaluating Real-Life Clinical Outcomes in Atrial Fibrillation Patients Receiving  the W ATCHMAN Left Atrial Appendage Closure Technology) prospective  registry showed a high rate of Watchman device procedural success (98.5%)  with a low ischemic stroke risk (1.1%). This low ischemic stroke was  demonstrated despite most of the patients (73%) not using oral anticoagulation  periprocedurally.6 The PINNACLE FLX (Protection Against Embolism for  Nonvalvular AF Patients: Investigational Device Evaluation of the Watchman  FLX LAA Closure Technology) prospective registry of the next-generation  Watchman FLX device showed a high rate of procedural success (98.8%) and a  low rate (0.5%) of the primary safety endpoint (death, ischemic stroke, systemic  embolism, procedure-related events requiring open cardiac surgery or major  endovascular intervention).7 Registry data have shown substantial variation in  postprocedure antithrombotic regimens in real-world practice compared with  protocols in the pivotal RCTs; the effect this has on long-term outcomes has not  been clearly established.8 ASAPTOO (Assessment of the Watchman Device in  Patients Unsuitable for Oral Anticoagulation) is an ongoing RCT evaluating the  et al. Page 40 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

safety and efficacy of LAAO in patients with AF who are deemed ineligible for  oral anticoagulation.9 2. PROTECT AF (Watchman Left Atrial Appendage System for Embolic  Protection in Patients With Atrial Fibrillation) was a noninferiority RCT  comparing pLAAO with the Watchman device with warfarin in patients with  AF at an increased risk for stroke. pLAAO was noninferior to warfarin for  both primary composite efficacy (stroke, systemic embolism, and cardiovascular/ unexplained death) and safety (procedure-related events and major bleeding)  endpoints.1 pLAAO was superior to warfarin in terms of cardiovascular mortality  (HR, 0.40, 95% CI, 0.21–0.75; P=0.005) and all-cause mortality (HR, 0.66,  95% CI, 0.45–0.98; P=0.004). The PREV AIL (Watchman Left Atrial Appendage  Closure Device in Patients With Atrial Fibrillation Versus Long Term Warfarin  Therapy) study was a follow-up RCT that compared the Watchman device with  warfarin in a similar patient population.2 pLAAO did not achieve noninferiority  for the first primary composite efficacy endpoint (stroke, systemic embolism,  and cardiovascular/unexplained death) but was limited in statistical power  because of unexpectedly low event rates. pLAAO was statistically noninferior  to warfarin for nonprocedure-related strokes. Higher implant success and lower  procedure-related safety event rates were observed in PREV AIL than PROTECT  AF. A 5-year patient-level meta-analysis of these trials demonstrated similar  efficacy of pLAAO for stroke prevention and reduced rates of major bleeding  compared with warfarin.3 PRAGUE-17 (Left Atrial Appendage Closure vs  Novel Anticoagulation Agents in Atrial Fibrillation) was an RCT that compared  pLAAO with DOACs in patients with nonvalvular AF.4 pLAAO was noninferior  to DOACs for the combined safety and efficacy composite endpoint (stroke, TIA,  systemic embolism, cardiovascular death, major or nonmajor clinically relevant  bleeding, or procedure-/device-related complications). 6.5.2. Cardiac Surgery—LAA Exclusion/Excision Recommendations for Cardiac Surgery–LAA Exclusion/Excision Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 A 1. In patients with AF undergoing cardiac surgery with a CHA2DS2-V ASc score ≥2 or equivalent  stroke risk, surgical LAA exclusion, in addition to continued anticoagulation, is indicated to reduce  the risk of stroke and systemic embolism.1–3 1 A 2. In patients with AF undergoing cardiac surgery and LAA exclusion, a surgical technique resulting  in absence of flow across the suture line and a stump of <1 cm as determined by intraoperative  transesophageal echocardiography should be used.1,4,5 2b A 3. In patients with AF undergoing cardiac surgery with CHA2DS2-V ASc score ≥2 or equivalent stroke  risk, the benefit of surgical LAA exclusion in the absence of continued anticoagulation to reduce the  risk of stroke and systemic embolism is uncertain.1–3 Synopsis: Surgical left atrial appendage occlusion (S-LAAO) for reduction in the risk  of recurrent arterial thromboemboli was first reported in 1949.6 After decades of relative  clinical equipoise,7,8 accumulating evidence,2,8–10 culminating in the large RCT LAAOS III  et al. Page 41 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

(Left Atrial Appendage Occlusion Study),1 supports a benefit of S-LAAO in patients with  AF who undergo2,9 coronary artery bypass graft surgery (CABG) or valve surgeries. A 2019  meta-analysis before the publication of LAAOS III reviewed 22 studies, including 280 585  patients of whom 36 686 underwent S-LAAO during cardiac surgery. S-LAAO showed an  association with a 29% lower risk of stroke or thromboembolism. The all-cause mortality  rate at 2 years was lower in patients who underwent S-LAAO. No benefit was found in  the subgroup of studies that included patients without preoperative AF.9 These favorable  findings were validated by the 4770-subject LAAOS III, which confirmed S-LAAO in  addition to OAC provides a 33% reduction in risk of stroke and systemic embolism.1 LAAOS III enrolled only patients with preexisting AF; evidence of the effectiveness of  S-LAAO in patients without AF is inconsistent and suggests the benefit of adjunctive  S-LAAO is unclear in patients without preoperative AF.7,9 The results of ongoing RCTs in  this population are awaited. Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. LAAOS III was performed with 4770 patients with AF and a CHA2DS2-V ASc  score ≥2 undergoing cardiac surgery randomized to S-LAAO or no S-LAAO.  Intraoperative transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) was recommended to  assess successful closure using an endorsed technique. Oral anticoagulation was  continued postoperatively. After a mean follow-up of 3.8 years, the primary  endpoint of stroke or systemic embolism occurred in 4.8% of the S-LAAO group  and 7.0% of the no S-LAAO group (HR, 0.67 [95% CI, 0.53–0.85]; P=0.001).  Mortality rate, cross-clamp and bypass time, chest tube output, and bleeding  were not different between groups. More than 75% of subjects in both groups  received OAC. These data indicate S-LAAO provides additional benefit to oral  anticoagulation without increasing risk of adverse events. These findings cannot be extrapolated to patients without AF or patients  who are not candidates for OAC. Most subjects underwent CABG or valve  surgery, and the mean CHA2DS2-V ASc score was 4.2. Surgical AF ablation was  performed in one-third of both groups. Patients undergoing mechanical valve  surgery, transplant, off-pump bypass, left ventricular assistive device surgery,  and congenital heart disease (CHD) cases were excluded. A subsequent metaanalysis of 5 RCTs and 22 observational studies including 540 111 patients  showed a significant decrease in stroke and thromboembolism with S-LAAO.11  The postoperative mortality rate did not differ but, in follow-up, was reduced  in the S-LAAO group after 2 years. No difference in major bleeding, all-cause  rehospitalizations, or cross-clamp time was observed.11 2. Substantial heterogeneity in S-LAAO methods exists in the literature, and not  all techniques effectively exclude the LAA.4 An increased risk of stroke and  thromboembolism is associated with incomplete S-LAAO5,12; however, many  studies do not report assessment of occlusion success.9 This inconsistency  has likely contributed to the variability in outcome.7,9 LAAOS III permitted  4 techniques: amputation and closure (which was promoted as the preferred  et al. Page 42 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

technique), used in 56%; stapler closure, used in 11%; double-layer linear  closure (if confirmed by TEE), used in 14%; or an approved LAAO device,  used in 15%. Other techniques were approved on a case-by-case basis (4%).  Intraoperative TEE was recommended to assess successful closure, defined as  absence of flow across the suture line and a stump of <1 cm. If the initial closure  was unsuccessful, additional suturing was performed for repair. Contemporary  data show closure success of >95% using a surgical clip device.13 In the LAAOS  series, the mean cross-clamp and bypass times were similar, and perioperative  bleeding was not increased in the S-LAAO group.1,4 These data support the  importance of complete S-LAAO in achieving beneficial outcomes. 3. In LAAOS III, S-LAAO reduced stroke and thromboembolism by 33% in  addition to OAC. LAAOS III was not designed to resolve whether oral  anticoagulation can be safely stopped after S-LAAO; at hospital discharge, >80%  of subjects in both groups were receiving OAC, with >75% on OAC at the  3-year visit.1 A systematic review and meta-analysis focusing on the effects  of anticoagulation found no statistically significant difference in stroke rates of  S-LAAO/no S-LAAO subjects on OAC versus off OAC, with high heterogeneity  noted for both ischemic events and mortality,14 and findings are subject to  confounding by indication and the potentially beneficial effects of surgical AF  ablation. The LAACS (Left Atrial Appendage Closure with Surgery) study of  187 subjects undergoing CABG, valve surgery, or both who were randomized  to S-LAAO versus no S-LAAO showed a reduction in the risk of stroke in  the S-LAAO group, independent of anticoagulation status.15 These results must  be interpreted with caution, however, because the study was not powered to  demonstrate a reduction in stroke, and substantial crossover occurred. 6.6. Active Bleeding on Anticoagulant Therapy and Reversal Drugs Recommendations for Active Bleeding on Anticoagulant Therapy and Reversal Drugs Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 B-NR 1. In patients with AF receiving dabigatran who develop life-threatening bleeding, treatment with  idarucizumab is recommended to rapidly reverse dabigatran’s anticoagulation effect.1–3 2a C-LD 2. In patients with AF receiving dabigatran who develop life-threatening bleeding, treatment  with activated prothrombin complex concentrate (PCC) is reasonable to reverse dabigatran’s  anticoagulation effect if idarucizumab is unavailable.4,5 1 B-NR* 3. In patients with AF receiving factor Xa inhibitors who develop life-threatening bleeding,  treatment with either andexanet alfa (apixaban or rivaroxaban,* edoxaban†) or 4-factor prothrombin  complex concentrate† is recommended to rapidly reverse factor Xa inhibitor’s anticoagulation  effect.6,7C-LD† 1 A 4. In patients with AF receiving warfarin who develop life-threatening bleeding, treatment with  4-factor prothrombin complex concentrate (if available) in addition to intravenous vitamin K is  recommended to rapidly achieve INR correction over fresh frozen plasma and intravenous vitamin  K treatment.8–10 2b B-NR 5. In patients with AF who develop major gastrointestinal bleeding, resumption of oral  anticoagulation therapy may be reasonable alter correction of reversible causes of bleeding and  reassessment of its long-term benefits and risks with a multidisciplinary team approach during  SDM with patients.11,12 et al. Page 43 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

*B-NR LOE applies to data on apixaban or rivaroxaban. †C-LD LOE applies to data on edoxaban. Synopsis—About 2% to 4% of patients who receive OACs experience major bleeding  and require intervention.13 Activated charcoal may be administered up to 6 to 8 hours  after the last dose of an OAC.14,15 Hemodialysis may be also considered to eliminate  dabigatran but may be challenging and impractical due to coagulopathy and hemodynamic  instability.16 The proportion of emergency department visits for bleeding from OACs due  to DOACs increased from 2.3% in 2011 to 37.9% in 2017 because of the increased  use of DOACs over the past decade.17 Some patients may require reversal agents to  achieve rapid hemostasis. Failure to achieve effective hemostasis is associated with a >3  times higher risk of death.18 Idarucizumab for dabigatran-induced major bleeding and  andexanet alfa for apixaban or rivaroxaban associated major bleeding are US Food and  Drug Administration (FDA) approved. Four-factor PCC for DOAC-induced major bleeding  was compared with andexanet alfa in retrospective cohort studies, but the comparison has  never been investigated in clinical trials.7 For VKA, if life-threatening bleeding cannot  be managed with supportive measures, the rapid reversal treatment with 4-factor PCC is  preferred over fresh frozen plasma.8–10 Table 15 summarizes reversal agents for OACs.  Table 16 describes bleeding events attributable to DOACs in pivotal clinical trials. Recommendation-Supportive Text 1. The RE-VERSE AD (Reversal of Dabigatran Anticoagulant Effect With  Idarucizumab) study was a multicenter, prospective cohort study evaluating the  use of idarucizumab in patients receiving dabigatran for the management of  uncontrolled or life-threatening bleeding or in patients requiring urgent surgery  or invasive procedure.1 In patients with uncontrolled or life-threatening bleeding,  idarucizumab reversed the dabigatran anticoagulation effect in 100% of patients,  and 67.7% had bleeding cessation. Thrombosis events after the reversal agent  use was 4.7% within 30 days. However, this study did not have a control  group. The post hoc analysis of the RE-VERSE AD study in patients with  gastrointestinal bleeding found that 97.5% of patients achieved complete reversal  of dabigatran, and bleeding cessation occurred in 76.2% of patients.2 Another  post hoc analysis of the same study showed that idarucizumab was effective  at reversing dabigatran’s anticoagulation effect, regardless of baseline renal  function.3 2. Compared with idarucizumab, the data on PCC for dabigatran-associated  bleeding are very limited. A prospective multicenter cohort study compared  the use of activated PCC in 14 patients with dabigatran-associated major  bleeding compared with historical matched cases.4 The study was prematurely  stopped due to the availability of idarucizumab in the market. The effectiveness  of activated PCC was assessed based on the assessment guide rating from  good, moderate, and poor. Nine patients (64%) were rated as good, 5 patients  (36%) as moderate, and none as poor. No thromboembolic events were  found. A randomized, placebo-controlled crossover trial in 12 healthy subjects  evaluated the reversal effect of 4-factor PCC on rivaroxaban or dabigatran’s  et al. Page 44 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

effect.5 It showed 4-factor PCC completely reversed rivaroxaban’s effect based  the prothrombin time, but it did not reverse dabigatran’s effect based on  the coagulation tests (aPTT, ecarin clotting time, and thrombin time). Fourfactor PCC may not be appropriate for dabigatran-associated major bleeding  management until further investigation is performed in prospective studies. 3. The ANNEXA 4 (Andexanet Alfa, a Novel Antidote to the Anticoagulation  Effects of Factor Xa Inhibitors) trial evaluated the use of andexanet alfa in  adult patients with acute major bleeding (safety population, n=254; efficacy  population, n=254) receiving factor Xa inhibitors (apixaban 55%, rivaroxaban  36%, edoxaban 3%, and enoxaparin 6%).6 It found that after the bolus  administration, the median anti-factor Xa activity decreased by 89%. Twelve  hours after the andexanet infusion, clinical hemostasis was adjudicated as  excellent or good in 37 of 47 patients in the efficacy analysis (79% [95% CI,  64%-89%]); however, thrombotic events occurred in 12 of 67 patients (18%)  during the 30-day follow-up. Currently, andexanet alfa is FDA-approved for only  apixaban- or rivaroxaban-associated life-threatening or uncontrolled bleeding,  because only limited data are available for other factor Xa inhibitors. For 4factor PCC, a meta-analysis of 22 observational studies compared andexanet alfa  (n=438) with PCC (n=1278) in patients with acute bleeding associated with oral  factor Xa inhibitors.7 It showed that mean hemostatic effectiveness for andexanet  alfa was 82% at 12 hours and 71% at 24 hours versus 88% at 12 hours and  76% at 24 hours for PCC. Mean 30-day venous thromboembolism rate was  5.0% in the andexanet alfa group versus 1.9% in the PCC group. However, the  meta-analysis had more significant methodological issues than the ANNEXA 4  trial. Thus, the level of evidence for the 4-factor PCC use was downgraded. 4. A meta-analysis of 13 studies (5 randomized trials and 8 observational studies)  compared 4-factor PCC with fresh frozen plasma for warfarin-associated  bleeding or urgent surgery/procedure.8 Four-factor PCC use was significantly  associated with lower risk of all-cause mortality (25.1% versus 28.8%; OR,  0.56 [95% CI, 0.37–0.84]), higher probability to achieve INR correction (60.6%  versus 12.8%; OR, 10.8 [95% CI, 6.12–19.07]), shortened time to INR correction  (−6.5 h [95% CI, −9.75 h to −3.24 h]), and lower risk of volume overload (2.1%  versus 8.8%; OR, 0.27 [95% CI, 0.13–0.58]) compared with fresh frozen plasma.  No significant difference in thromboembolic events (4.2% versus 4.8%; OR, 0.91  [95% CI, 0.44–1.89]; P=0.81) was found. 5. A meta-analysis of 10 cohort studies compared anticoagulation resumption  (n=2080) versus discontinuation (n=2296) after gastrointestinal bleeding in  patients receiving OACs for AF, venous thromboembolism, or prosthetic valve.11  Restarting anticoagulation was significantly associated with higher risks of  recurrent gastrointestinal bleeding (10.1% versus 5.3%) but also with lower  risks of thromboembolic events (6.3% versus 10.6%) and a reduction in allcause mortality (21.3% versus 31%). Another meta-analysis of 7 observational  studies in patients with AF found no significant difference in stroke rates  between resumption and discontinuation groups (9.1% versus 8.3%; OR, 0.75  et al. Page 45 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

[95% CI, 0.37–1.51]).12 Resumption of anticoagulation therapy was associated  with significant reduction in any thromboembolic events (8.0% versus 12.2%;  OR, 0.54 [95% CI, 0.43–0.68]) and all-cause mortality (10.8% absolute risk  reduction; OR, 0.38 [95% CI, 0.24–0.60]), at the expense of recurrent major  bleeding (10.2% versus 5.0%). One study found the optimal timing of resuming  a VKA after upper gastrointestinal bleeding was between 3 and 6 weeks,  while other studies revealed that resuming a VKA 1 week after gastrointestinal  bleeding is the optimal timing.19–21 There is a paucity of data evaluating the  timing of DOACs after gastrointestinal bleeding. 6.6.1. Management of Patients With AF and ICH Recommendations for Management of Patients With AF and ICH Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 2a C-LD 1. In patients with AF and conditions associated with very high risk of thromboembolic events (>5%/ year), such as rheumatic heart disease or a mechanical heart valve, early (1–2 weeks) resumption of  anticoagulation after ICH is reasonable to reduce the risk of thromboembolic events.1 2b C-LD 2. In patients with AF and ICH, delayed (4–8 weeks) resumption of anticoagulation may be  considered to balance the risks of thromboembolic and hemorrhagic complications after careful  risk benefit assessment.2–5 2b B-NR 3. In patients with AF and conditions associated with high risk of recurrent ICH (eg, cerebral  amyloid angiopathy) anticoagulation-sparing strategies (eg, LAAO) may be considered to reduce the  risk of recurrent hemorrhage.6,7 Synopsis: ICH is a term that refers to bleeding within any of the compartments of the  cranial vault, including intraparenchymal (or intracerebral), subarachnoid, subdural, and  epidural hemorrhage. In clinical practice, the different forms of ICH are often classified by  mechanism and most broadly as traumatic and nontraumatic or spontaneous ICHs (Figure  14). In patients with AF and conditions associated with high-risk for thromboembolic  complications (eg, mechanical valve, rheumatic valvular disease), anticoagulation is  often resumed early after ICH, regardless of mechanism. For other patients with  AF, decisions regarding if (and when) to resume anticoagulation after ICH requires  more careful risk-benefit assessment of patient-specific clinical factors. Patients with  traumatic etiologies generally have lower long-term risk of recurrent hemorrhage, and  anticoagulation is generally considered safe to resume. Nontraumatic/spontaneous etiologies  (eg, hypertensive parenchymal hemorrhage, hemorrhagic transformation after ischemic  stroke, cerebral amyloid angiopathy-associated hemorrhage, chronic subdural hemorrhage)  are generally associated with higher risk of recurrence. Clinical decision-making regarding  the appropriateness of resumption in these patients is based largely on individual risk-benefit  calculations given the lack of randomized data assessing safety and long-term outcomes.  For patients with ICH deemed at high risk of recurrence, LAA closure may be a viable  alternative to anticoagulation, although data on efficacy and safety are lacking in the ICH  population. et al. Page 46 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. Rheumatic valvular disease is associated with a >5% per year risk of embolic  events.8 In patients with mechanical heart valves, the rate can range from 4% to  23% per year depending on the type and position of the prosthetic.9–11 These  rates are even higher in patients with concurrent AF but are significantly reduced  with the use of VKAs. Data are limited that explore the safety and timing of  anticoagulation resumption in patients with ICH and high-risk valvular disease.  In 1 observational analysis of 137 patients with ICH and mechanical heart  valves, resuming anticoagulation within 2 weeks from index ICH was associated  with increased hemorrhagic complications (HR, 7.06 [95% CI, 2.33–21.37]).1  However, in balancing the risk of hemorrhagic with thrombotic complications,  the optimal window of resumption was found to be between 1 and 2 weeks  post-ICH after weighing individual patient factors (Table 17). 2. Anticoagulation is associated with up to 25% of ICHs and is associated with  worse functional outcomes and higher mortality.12–15 After ICH, anticoagulation  is generally held in the acute setting. Decisions regarding the appropriateness and  timing of resumption are complex given the limited amount of randomized data  addressing risks and benefits in this population. Previous observational reports  evaluating risk of recurrent ICH, thromboembolism, and mortality in patients  with nonvalvular AF have suggested possible reduction in thromboembolic risk  and mortality with resumption of anticoagulation but are limited by discordant  patient populations and study designs, predominant use of VKAs, and potential  selection biases.16–22 In a meta-analysis of 2452 patients with AF and ICH,  resumption of OACs was associated with lower risk of ischemic stroke (RR,  0.46 [95% CI, 0.29–0.72]) and no difference in risk of recurrent ICH compared  with patients in whom anticoagulation was not resumed2 (Table 17). However,  data are limited on the optimal timing for resumption. In an analysis of 2619  ICH survivors with AF, a composite net benefit minimizing risk of bleeding and  thromboembolic complications occurred when anticoagulation was resumed at 7  to 8 weeks after ICH.3 In a retrospective study that included 1752 patients with  OAC-related ICH across 3 Danish registries, anticoagulation resumed a median  of 34 days was associated with an adjusted HR of ischemic stroke, systemic  embolism, and all-cause mortality of 0.55 (95% CI, 0.39–0.78) compared  with no anticoagulation.4 In another meta-analysis of 8 observational studies,  resuming OAC was associated with reduced risk of ischemic stroke without  increased risk of recurrent ICH at a median time to resumption of 10 to 39 days5  (Table 17). Of note, DOACs have been associated with lower rates of major  bleeding complications compared with VKAs.23 3. Anticoagulation is used for stroke risk reduction in patients with AF at risk  of thromboembolism. For some patients, however, risk of recurrent ICH may  be prohibitively high with anticoagulation. Cerebral amyloid angiopathy is the  most common cause of lobar hemorrhage in older adults and is associated  with annual ICH recurrence risk that ranges from 5% in patients with isolated  microhemorrhages to 26.9% in patients with associated cortical superficial  et al. Page 47 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

siderosis.24 Thus, in patients with AF and cerebral amyloid angiopathy-related  ICH, alternative strategies for secondary stroke prevention are often pursued.  The LAA is considered the most common site for thrombus formation in  patients with AF.25,26 Two RCTs—PROTECT AF study and PREV AIL study— compared rates of stroke and mortality after LAA closure versus VKA in patients  with AF.6,7 In a meta-analysis examining 5-year outcomes in the 2 RCTs,  LAA closure was associated with significant reductions in hemorrhagic stroke,  disabling and fatal stroke, and all-cause mortality, with comparable rates of  stroke and systemic embolism compared with warfarin.27 Of note, both studies  excluded patients who were not candidates for anticoagulation. Additionally,  newer treatment options such as epicardial LAA clipping are emerging for stroke  prevention without need for postprocedure APT.28,29 6.7. Periprocedural Management Recommendations for Periprocedural Management Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 B-R* 1. In patients with AF (excluding those with recent stroke or TIA, or a mechanical valve)  and on oral anticoagulation with either warfarin* or DOAC† who are scheduled to undergo  an invasive procedure or surgery, temporary cessation of oral anticoagulation without bridging  anticoagulation is recommended.1–4B-NR† 1 A 2. In patients with AF on warfarin anticoagulation and an annual predicted risk of  thromboembolism of ≥5% undergoing pacemaker or defibrillator implantation or generator  change, continued anticoagulation is recommended in preference to interruption of warfarin and  bridging anticoagulation with heparin to reduce the risk of pocket hematoma.5–7 2a A 3. In patients with AF with CHA2DS2-V ASc score ≥2 or equivalent risk of stroke, on DOAC  anticoagulation and undergoing pacemaker or defibrillator implantation or generator change,  either uninterrupted or interrupted DOAC is reasonable.8–10 1 B-NR 4. In patients with AF on DOAC and scheduled to undergo an invasive procedure or surgery  that cannot be performed safely on uninterrupted anticoagulation, the timing of interruption  of DOAC should be guided by the specific agent, renal function, and the bleeding risk of the  procedure (Table 18).4,11,12 2a B-NR 5. In patients with AF on DOAC that has been interrupted for an invasive procedure or surgery,  in general, resumption of anticoagulation the day after low bleeding risk surgery and between the  evening of the second day and the evening of the third day after high bleeding risk surgery is  reasonable, as long as hemostasis has been achieved and further bleeding is not anticipated.4 3:  Harm B-R 6. In patients with AF on warfarin anticoagulation, who are undergoing surgeries or procedures  for which they are holding warfarin, except in patients with mechanical valve or recent  stroke or TIA, bridging anticoagulation with low-molecular-weight heparin should not be  administered.1,3,13–15 *B-R LOE applies to the data on warfarin. †B-NR LOE applies to the data on DOAC. Synopsis—Periprocedural anticoagulation management is driven by 2 competing aims:  to hold the anticoagulant agent for the shortest possible time to minimize the risk of  thromboembolism and to ensure coagulation parameters are as close to normal as possible  at the time of the procedure to facilitate hemostasis and avoid intra- and postoperative  bleeding. Considerations include the bleeding risk of the procedure, consequences of  bleeding should it occur, patient-specific risk factors, and thrombotic risk while off  et al. Page 48 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

anticoagulation. Invasive procedures and surgeries have been divided into high and low  bleeding risks in several different classifications.16 Generally, endoscopic, dental extraction,  many ophthalmologic procedures, and percutaneous vascular access, such as cardiac  catheterization, are considered to be of low bleeding risk. Higher bleeding risk surgeries  include intra-abdominal, pelvic, orthopedic, neurosurgical, cardiac, and transvenous lead  extraction procedures. Very high bleeding risk procedures include neuraxial anesthesia  and spinal surgery. Available data do not suggest high rates of bleeding from these  procedures, although bleeding could cause significant consequences.17 Patient-specific  factors include abnormal liver and kidney function, bleeding or clotting disorders,  concomitant antiplatelet or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory use, alcohol, and anemia.  Recent bleeding or thromboembolism may increase the risk for recurrent events. To put  thrombotic risk in perspective, the incidence of thromboembolism while anticoagulation was  temporarily held has generally been <1%.3,18 Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. To mitigate thromboembolic risk during interruption of warfarin therapy for a  procedure or surgery, “bridging” anticoagulation can be administered. However,  observational studies consistently showed an increased risk of bleeding without  a difference in thromboembolic risk with this strategy.3 The BRIDGE (Bridging  Anticoagulation in Patients who Require Temporary Interruption of Warfarin  Therapy for an Elective Invasive Procedure or Surgery) trial included patients  with a mean CHADS2 score of 2.3 (range, 1–6); 61.7% of patients had a  CHADS2 score <3.1 In this study, discussed in more depth below, interruption  of warfarin without bridging anticoagulation was superior to bridging.1 In  a meta-analysis of 6 observational studies reporting on patients not at high  thromboembolic risk receiving prophylactic dose or no bridging had an overall  thromboembolic event rate of 0.6% (11 of 1702). 3 A similar RCT has  not been done in the DOAC era, given the ease of brief interruption of  DOAC therapy; however, observational studies have shown similar results.2 The  PAUSE (Perioperative Anticoagulation Use for Surgery Evaluation) cohort study,  discussed below, enrolling patients with a mean CHADS2 score of 2.1 (range,  1–6) and CHA2DS2-V ASc score of 3.5 (range, 1–9), found a low incidence  of thromboembolic events when DOAC was briefly interrupted without  bridging.4 This suggests that in patients at low-to-moderate thromboembolic  risk, interruption of anticoagulation, without bridging, may provide a low risk of  bleeding with an acceptable risk of stroke/TIA. Patients with mechanical valves,  and recent stroke/TIA, or other high-risk markers, were not included in most  studies and may still benefit from bridging anticoagulation: in these scenarios,  management should be individualized. 2. Evidence has accrued that periprocedural unfractionated or low-molecularweight heparin bridging has been associated with an increased risk of pocket  hematoma after pacemaker or ICD procedures.19 BRUISE-CONTROL (Bridge  or Continue Coumadin for Device Surgery Randomized Controlled Trial)  randomized patients with AF (88%) or a mechanical valve with an estimated  et al. Page 49 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

annual stroke risk of ≥5%, and undergoing elective device surgery, to continued  warfarin versus warfarin interruption with bridging anticoagulation. The  incidence of clinically significant pocket hematoma was >4 times higher in the  bridging group.5 Several other procedures have been performed on uninterrupted  anticoagulation.20 Further study is needed to define which procedures, in which  patients, can safely be performed with uninterrupted anticoagulation. Lead  extraction procedures are generally considered high bleeding risk and therefore  should be treated as such (high bleeding risk procedures in Table 18) and  warfarin interrupted, with occasional exceptions. 3. Two RCTs and several observational studies have shown little or no difference  in the risk of pocket hematoma and thromboembolic events in patients with AF  anticoagulated with DOACs and undergoing device surgery.8–10 Therefore, brief  interruption of DOAC therapy (low bleeding risk procedures in Table 18 may be  preferable for many, while uninterrupted DOAC may be preferred for those at  particularly high thromboembolic risk. Lead extraction procedures are generally  considered high bleeding risk and therefore should be treated as such (high  bleeding risk procedures in Table 18) and DOAC interrupted, with occasional  exceptions. 4. To achieve the goals of reducing or eliminating anticoagulant effect at the  time of surgery, while also minimizing the time the patient spends without  anticoagulation to prevent thromboembolism, the duration of cessation of  anticoagulation should take into account both the pharmacokinetics and  pharmacodynamics of the agent, the patient’s renal function, and the bleeding  risk of the procedure. Direct measurement of DOAC levels is unavailable in  clinical practice, but levels <30 ng/mL, which correspond to the expected plasma  DOAC concentration reached after 3 half-lives, when most of the drug (87.5%  of the Cmax) has been eliminated, is reached in two-thirds of patients 24 to 48  hours after the last drug intake.11 Similar results were observed for apixaban.12  A drug “hold” of 48 hours in clinical practice typically means 2 full days  without drug intake, in addition to the day of the procedure, leading to a longer  interval between last drug intake and procedure start longer than 48 hours,  usually an additional 12 hours. Meta-analysis of the reports of periprocedural  events from the pivotal trials of each of the 4 available DOACs suggested similar  outcomes in patients on DOAC or warfarin, with reduced major bleeding during  an uninterrupted strategy with DOACs.21 The PAUSE protocol was studied in  patients on apixaban, dabigatran, and rivaroxaban, and resulted in low rates of  major bleeding (0.9%-1.85%) and thromboembolism (<1%). A high rate (>90%)  of minimal anticoagulant level (<50 ng/mL) was achieved. Similar results have  been observed with edoxaban in clinical practice.22 Different protocols have not  been directly compared. Table 18 presents recommended DOAC interruption  times based on agent, renal function, and the bleeding risk of the procedure. 5. The timing of resumption of interrupted anticoagulation after surgery is a  complex decision that should integrate patient and surgical characteristics.  Warfarin, which takes several days (usually 3–5) to become therapeutic,  et al. Page 50 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

can often be restarted the evening of the procedure. Postoperative bridging  anticoagulation has not been shown to be generally beneficial.1,13 In the PAUSE  study, DOACs were started on the first postoperative day for low bleeding risk  procedures and between the evening of the second and third postoperative days  for high bleeding risk procedures. This resulted in a low risk of major bleeding.4  Input from the proceduralist should always be incorporated into decisions. 6. Several studies have compared a strategy of bridging anticoagulation with a  comparator of no bridging in patients on anticoagulants who were scheduled  to undergo an invasive procedure or surgery. The BRIDGE trial randomized  1 884 patients with AF or AFL to bridging anticoagulation before and  after the procedure with dalteparin versus placebo.1 Almost 90% of patients  were undergoing low bleeding risk procedures. No bridging was superior to  bridging with respect to major bleeding and was noninferior with respect  to thromboembolism, although the observed rate (0.4%) was lower than  anticipated (1.0%). PERIOP2 (A Double Blind Randomized Control Trial  of Post-Operative Low Molecular Weight Heparin Bridging Therapy Versus  Placebo Bridging Therapy for Patients Who Are at High Risk for Arterial  Thromboembolism) randomized patients, about two-thirds of whom were  undergoing high bleeding risk procedures, and 79% of whom had AF, to  postoperative bridging with dalteparin or placebo until the INR was >1.9.  All patients received preoperative bridging. Bleeding and thromboembolism  outcomes were similar.13 These studies also excluded patients with recent  bleeding or thromboembolism, and those undergoing spinal and neurological  surgery, and in these cases, management should be individualized and may  include bridging anticoagulation.1,13 A small randomized trial found that dental  extractions could be performed on uninterrupted warfarin without bridging.14 A  large multicenter registry also did not find a difference in thromboembolism,  but an increase in bleeding, in bridged patients.15 Patients with mechanical  valves should be managed as outlined in the “2020 ACC/AHA Guideline for the  Management of Patients With Valvular Heart Disease.”23 6.8. Anticoagulation in Specific Populations 6.8.1. AF Complicating ACS or Percutaneous Coronary Intervention (PCI) Recommendations for AF Complicating ACS or PCI Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 A 1. In patients with AF and an increased risk for stroke who undergo PCI, DOACs are preferred over  VKAs in combination with APT to reduce the risk of clinically relevant bleeding.1–5 1 A 2. In most patients with AF who take oral anticoagulation and undergo PCI, early discontinuation of  aspirin (1–4 wk) and continuation of dual antithrombotic therapy with OAC and a P2Y12 inhibitor  is preferred over triple therapy (OAC, P2Y12 inhibitor, and aspirin) to reduce the risk of clinically  relevant bleeding.1–4,6 et al. Page 51 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Synopsis: Encountering a patient with AF at an increased risk for stroke who undergoes  PCI for stable CAD or ACS is a common clinical scenario. The addition of APT to OAC  after PCI introduces a risk for clinically significant bleeding. RCTs have compared the  safety and efficacy of various antithrombotic regimens after PCI is performed in patients  with AF. They have consistently shown that DOACs, when used in conjunction with APT,  are associated with a lower risk of clinically relevant bleeding compared to VKAs.1–5 They  have also shown that dual therapy with an OAC and single APT with a P2Y12 inhibitor  significantly lowers the risk of clinically relevant bleeding compared with triple therapy  (oral anticoagulation, P2Y12 inhibitor, and aspirin) without substantially increasing risk of  major adverse cardiovascular events.1–4,6 Meta-analyses of these trials have shown a slightly  increased risk of stent thrombosis with dual therapy compared to triple therapy.5 Thus, the  risk of stent thrombosis must be weighed against the risk of bleeding in determining the  antithrombotic regimen after PCI. This is particularly true in patients with a relatively high  perceived risk of stent thrombosis (complex revascularization, multivessel PCI, previous  history of stent thrombosis). Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. Post-PCI antithrombotic regimens comparing DOACs with VKAs in  combination with APT in patients with AF who do not have a specific  indication for VKAs (eg, mechanical valve) have consistently shown a  reduction in clinically relevant bleeding.1,2,4 A meta-analysis of 3 RCTs  comparing DOACs with VKAs after PCI, PIONEER AF-PCI (Open-Label,  Randomized, Controlled, Multicenter Study Exploring Two Treatment Strategies  of Rivaroxaban and a Dose-Adjusted Oral Vitamin K Antagonist Treatment  Strategy in Subjects with Atrial Fibrillation who Undergo Percutaneous  Coronary Intervention) (rivaroxaban), RE-DUAL PCI trial (Randomized  Evaluation of Dual Antithrombotic Therapy with Dabigatran versus Triple  Therapy with Warfarin in Patients with Nonvalvular Atrial Fibrillation  Undergoing Percutaneous Coronary Intervention) (dabigatran), and AUGUSTUS  (Open-Label, 2×2 Factorial, Randomized, Controlled Clinical Trial to Evaluate  the Safety of Apixaban vs Vitamin K Antagonist and Aspirin vs Aspirin  Placebo in Patients With Atrial Fibrillation and Acute Coronary Syndrome  and/or Percutaneous Coronary Intervention) (apixaban), showed a 42% relative  risk reduction for major bleeding in DOAC-based regimens compared with  VKA-based regimens (OR, 0.577 [95% CI, 0.477–0.698]; P<0.001).5 There  was no statistically significant difference in the risk of ischemic events  between groups. The ENTRUST-AF PCI (Edoxaban Treatment vs Vitamin  K Antagonist in Patients With Atrial Fibrillation Undergoing Percutaneous  Coronary Intervention) trial showed that edoxaban-based regimens were  noninferior to VKA-based regimens in terms of clinically relevant bleeding after  PCI.3 An important limitation of the aforementioned data is that most studies  compared DOACs monotherapy against VKA plus aspirin, the only VKA-based  dual antithrombotic therapy (DAT) regimen was available in AUGUSTUS trial,  thus providing limited information in comparison to DOAC-based DAT regimens  available in all trials.5 et al. Page 52 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

2. RCTs have supported DAT with OAC and a P2Y12 inhibitor over triple therapy  with OAC, P2Y12 inhibitor, and aspirin to reduce the risk of clinically relevant  bleeding in patients with AF after PCI, including WOEST (What Is the Optimal  Antiplatelet and Anticoagulant Therapy in Patients with Oral Anticoagulation  and Coronary Stenting) (VKA), PIONEER AF-PCI (rivaroxaban), RE-DUAL  (dabigatran), and AUGUSTUS (apixaban).1,2,4,6 A meta-analysis of PIONEER  AF-PCI, RE-DUAL, and AUGUSTUS demonstrated a 40% relative risk  reduction for International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis major  bleeding in dual therapy regimens compared with triple therapy (OR, 0.598  [95% CI, 0.491–0.727]; P<0.001).5 Patients in the intervention group received  varying duration of triple therapy with aspirin after PCI up to 7 days. This  meta-analysis showed that DAT with DOAC and P2Y12 inhibitor was associated  with an increased risk of stent thrombosis (OR, 1.672 [95% CI, 1.022–2.733];  P=0.041) compared with triple therapy.5 This finding was mainly driven by  outcomes in the 110-mg dosing group of dabigatran in the RE-DUAL trial. The  number needed to treat for International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis  major bleeding (n=42) was substantially lower than the number needed to  harm for stent thrombosis (n=223) with DAT compared with triple therapy.5  Based on these findings, extended triple therapy up to 30 days after PCI is a  consideration when the perceived risk of stent thrombosis is high (eg, complex  revascularization, multivessel PCI, previous history of stent thrombosis). 6.8.2. Chronic Coronary Disease (CCD) Recommendation for CCD Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendation 1 B-R 1. In patients with AF and CCD (beyond 1 year after revascularization or CAD not requiring  coronary revascularization) without history of stent thrombosis, oral anticoagulation monotherapy is  recommended over the combination therapy of OAC and single APT (aspirin or P2Y12 inhibitor) to  decrease the risk of major bleeding.1–3 Synopsis: APT is the first-line therapy to prevent recurrent cardiovascular events in patients  with CAD, while anticoagulation therapy is recommended to prevent stroke or systemic  embolism in patients with AF at increased risk of thromboembolism. Minimal evidence was  available until recently if a combination therapy of APT in addition to OAC therapy provides  additional value to prevent cardiovascular events in patients with AF and concomitant CCD  (at least 12 months after revascularization or CAD not requiring coronary revascularization)  compared with oral anticoagulation monotherapy. A recent landmark clinical trial showed  that rivaroxaban monotherapy significantly decreased the primary composite outcome  (stroke, systemic embolism, MI, unstable angina requiring revascularization, or death from  any cause) and decreased the risk of major bleeding compared with the combination  therapy.1 The subgroup analysis of the previously mentioned clinical trial in patients with  AF only after coronary stenting and another clinical trial corroborated the main findings in a  similar population.2,3 et al. Page 53 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. An RCT compared the rivaroxaban monotherapy (n=1107) with the combination  of rivaroxaban and a single APT (n=1108) in patients with AF and CCD  or CAD not requiring revascularization.1 The primary efficacy outcome was  the composite of stroke, systemic embolism, MI, unstable angina requiring  revascularization, or death from any cause. Rivaroxaban monotherapy was  noninferior to dual therapy for the primary outcome (4.14% versus 5.75%/ patient-year; HR, 0.72 [95% CI, 0.55–0.95]) and was superior for primary  safety endpoint of major bleeding (1.62% versus 2.76%/patient-year; HR, 0.59  [95% CI, 0.39–0.89]) compared with combination therapy. Another clinical  trial also showed the composite outcome of death from all causes, MI, stroke,  or systemic embolism (15.7% versus 13.6%; HR, 1.16 [95% CI, 0.79–1.72];  P=0.20 for noninferiority); the major bleeding risk in the oral anticoagulation  monotherapy group was numerically lower than the combination therapy group  (7.8% versus 10.4%; HR, 0.73 [95% CI, 0.44–1.20]).2 However, this trial was  terminated prematurely because of slow enrollment and did not have enough  power for noninferiority; thus, it was inconclusive. Of note, both clinical trials  excluded patients with history of stent thrombosis. Further investigation of oral  anticoagulation therapy in patients with a history of stent thrombosis is needed. 6.8.3. Peripheral Artery Disease (PAD) Recommendation for PAD Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendation 2a B-NR 1. In patients with AF and concomitant stable PAD, monotherapy oral anticoagulation is reasonable  over dual therapy (anticoagulation plus aspirin or P2Y12 inhibitors) to reduce the risk of bleeding.1–5 Synopsis: Antiplatelet monotherapy is the standard of care for patients with symptomatic  PAD and reasonable in asymptomatic PAD with ankle-brachial index ≤0.90 to reduce  the risk of MI, stroke, and vascular death.6 The 2016 AHA/ACC PAD guidelines  recommend against anticoagulation for ischemic event risk reduction in the general PAD  population (COR 3; LOE A) due to increased risk of bleeding without significant reduction  in ischemic events compared with antiplatelet monotherapy,6,7 without making specific  recommendations for patients with comorbid PAD and AF. Conversely, anticoagulation  is recommended for patients with AF at intermediate-to-high risk of stroke due to the  inferiority of APT to prevent stroke and systemic thromboembolism in this population.  Subgroup analysis of landmark DOAC clinical trials demonstrate comparable efficacy and  safety of DOACs compared with warfarin among patients with AF with and without PAD.2– 4 Clinical trial evidence is lacking to guide decisions regarding DAT in the setting of  concomitant AF and PAD (whether stable PAD or after lower extremity revascularization).  Observational studies of patients with concomitant AF and PAD treated with OAC  monotherapy compared with dual therapy (OAC plus antiplatelet) found an increased risk  of bleeding on dual therapy without reduction in major adverse cardiac events.5,8 However,  et al. Page 54 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

an important limitation of these studies was the lack of PAD-specific outcomes such as  acute or critical limb ischemia, revascularization, or amputation as primary or secondary  outcomes.5,8 Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text: 1. In the W A VE (Warfarin Antiplatelet  Vascular Evaluation) trial of patients with PAD but without AF, dual therapy (antiplatelet  plus warfarin) did not reduce the primary outcome of MI, stroke, cardiovascular death  (RR, 0.92 [95% CI, 0.73–1.16]; P=0.48) compared with monotherapy (antiplatelet alone),  and dual therapy increased the risk of life-threatening bleeding (RR, 3.41 [95% CI,  1.84–6.35]; P<0.001).7 Meta-analysis of 3 RCT subgroup analyses (ENGAGE AF-TIMI  48, ARISTOTLE, ROCKET AF; total N=2 564) compared safety and efficacy outcomes  between warfarin and DOACs in patients with concomitant AF and PAD.1–4 The metaanalysis demonstrated similar efficacy for DOACs compared with warfarin, including stroke  and systemic embolism (RR, 0.93 [95% CI, 0.61–1.42]; P=0.73), all-cause death (RR, 0.91  [95% CI, 0.70–1.19]; P=0.50), and MI (RR, 1.10 [95% CI, 0.64–1.90]; P=0.74), without  a statistically significant difference in the risk of major bleeding (RR, 1.12 [95% CI,  0.70–1.81]; P=0.63) or ICH (RR, 0.54 [95% CI, 0.16–1.85]; P=0.33).1 In ORBIT-AF II  (The Outcomes Registry for Better Informed Treatment of Atrial Fibrillation II),5 among  AF patients with concomitant vascular disease (CAD or PAD), major adverse cardiac  or neurological events and bleeding events were compared between patients on OAC  monotherapy versus dual therapy (OAC plus APT). Major adverse cardiac or neurological  events (HR, 1.5 [95% CI, 1.00–2.25]) did not differ significantly between mono- and dual  therapy, while dual therapy was associated with an increased risk of bleeding (HR, 2.27  [95% CI, 1.38–3.73]; P=0.001).5 6.8.4. Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD)/Kidney Failure Recommendations for CKD/Kidney Failure Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 B-R 1. For patients with AF at elevated risk for stroke and CKD stage 3, treatment with warfarin  or, preferably, evidence-based doses of direct thrombin or factor Xa inhibitors (Table 19) is  recommended to reduce the risk of stroke.1–3 2a B-NR 2. For patients with AF at elevated risk for stroke and CKD stage 4, treatment with warfarin or  labeled doses of DOACs is reasonable to reduce the risk of stroke.4,5 2b B-NR 3. For patients with AF at elevated risk for stroke and who have end-stage CKD (CrCl <15 mL/min)  or are on dialysis, it might be reasonable to prescribe warfarin (INR 2.0–3.0) or an evidence-based  dose of apixaban for oral anticoagulation to reduce the risk of stroke.6,7 Synopsis: CKD is a risk factor for stroke in patients with AF, independent of other  risk factors.8 The prevalence of AF among patients with renal failure on dialysis is  high, including asymptomatic AF.9 Despite compelling evidence in the general population,  conflicting data exist as to whether AF is a risk factor for stroke in patients on dialysis.10,11  Potential explanations for this discrepancy include competing risks of stroke and mortality, a  high prevalence of undiagnosed AF in cohorts thought not to have AF, and the confounding  effect of anticoagulation thrice weekly during hemodialysis.12 VKAs are limited by a  et al. Page 55 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

markedly reduced time in therapeutic range in patients with severe CKD, including those on  dialysis,13 and association with calciphylaxis.14 The pivotal DOAC trials excluded patients  on dialysis, and recommendations for dosing are based on pharmacokinetic data only. Early  experience with dabigatran and rivaroxaban in this population suggested an increased risk  of bleeding relative to warfarin, driven by the higher dose of each.15 Only dabigatran is  substantially removed by dialysis.16 A small RCT and a retrospective population-based  cohort study found a lower risk of thromboembolism with rivaroxaban versus warfarin,17,18  but these findings await confirmation in larger studies. Limited data on LAAO exist in this  group of patients, and prospective comparison to anticoagulation or no therapy is awaited.19 Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. Early trials demonstrating the role of warfarin anticoagulation in preventing  stroke did not enroll or separately report outcomes in patients with CKD. An  analysis of the SPAF III trial showed that dose-adjusted warfarin, compared with  fixed low-dose warfarin plus aspirin, reduced the risk of stroke with a similar  magnitude to patients with normal kidney function.3 In the A VERROES trial  of apixaban versus aspirin in patients deemed unsuitable for warfarin, apixaban  showed similar efficacy in patients with an estimated glomerular filtration rate  (eGFR) of 25 to 50 mL/min as those with an eGFR >50 mL/min.20 Patients with  CKD stage 3, which includes those with an eGFR of 30 to 60 mL/min, were  enrolled in the pivotal trials of the DOACs and showed similar results compared  with warfarin as seen in patients with normal kidney function.2 2. Evidence on the use of anticoagulation in patients with AF and stage 4  CKD (eGFR, 15–30 mL/min/1.73 m2) is largely observational. A prospective,  multicenter cohort study of survivors of MI with AF found that warfarin  prescription at discharge associated with a reduced risk of death, readmission due  to MI, ischemic stroke, and bleeding.5 An analysis of patients with CrCl 25 to  30 mL/min at the time of enrollment in the ARISTOTLE trial found numerically  fewer stroke and major bleeding events with apixaban than warfarin.4 Because  CrCl overestimates eGFR, a proportion of the patients enrolled in the pivotal  clinical trials of DOACs, which used CrCl cut-offs for enrollment, had CKD  stage 4 as assessed by eGFR in current clinical practice. 3. The role of anticoagulation in patients with AF and severe CKD, including  those on dialysis, is controversial.6,7,21,22 Pending the results of RCTs comparing  warfarin with no treatment, and warfarin with DOACs, SDM incorporating risks  of bleeding and thromboembolism is encouraged. The pivotal clinical trials of  apixaban excluded patients with CrCl <25 mL/min.23,24 Subsequently, the FDAapproved labeling was extended to include those with end-stage renal failure,  including those on hemodialysis.25 A subsequent pharmacokinetic study found  that drug levels with apixaban 2.5 mg twice daily approximate those seen with  5 mg twice daily in patients with normal renal function, suggesting 2.5 mg is  a more appropriate dose in such patients.26 A large retrospective cohort study  of Medicare beneficiaries found no difference in thromboembolism, but less  major bleeding, in patients treated with apixaban versus warfarin.27 Another  et al. Page 56 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

analysis found an increased risk of thromboembolism and of fatal or intracranial  bleeding with apixaban 5 mg twice daily versus no anticoagulation but not with  apixaban 2.5 mg twice daily.28 Two small trials of apixaban versus warfarin  in patients with AF on hemodialysis could not show differences in safety or  efficacy outcomes but significantly more bleeding than stroke events.29,30 6.8.5. AF in VHD Recommendations for AF in VHD Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 B-R 1. In patients with rheumatic mitral stenosis or mitral stenosis of moderate or greater severity and  history of AF, long-term anticoagulation with warfarin is recommended over DOACs, independent of  the CHA2DS2-V ASc score to prevent cardiovascular events, including stroke or death.1 1 B-NR 2. In patients with AF and valve disease other than moderate or greater mitral stenosis or a  mechanical heart valve, DOACs are recommended over VKAs.2–8 Synopsis: At least one-third of patients with AF have some degree of VHD. Patients with  AF and VHD have a higher prevalence of stroke and systemic thromboembolism than  those patients with AF without VHD.9 Patients with VHD and AF should be evaluated  for risk of thromboembolic events and treated with oral anticoagulation if they are at high  risk or if they have significant mitral stenosis or a mechanical heart valve. VKAs are the  anticoagulation drugs of choice for patients with rheumatic mitral stenosis, mechanical heart  valves, and new-onset AF within 3 months after mechanical aortic or mitral valve surgery.10 Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. Historical data have reported that in patients with mitral stenosis and AF, stroke  risk was nearly 18-fold higher than an age-, sex-, and hypertension-matched  population without AF.11 More recently, stroke or systemic embolism rates  ranged between 0.4 and 4 per 100 patient-years among anticoagulated patients  and were highest in those with previous embolism. Warfarin is generally  prescribed, but it has been questioned whether a DOAC may be an alternative. A  retrospective cohort study from Korea examined 2230 individuals with mitral  stenosis and AF who were prescribed either warfarin or a DOAC, using  propensity matching on 10 clinical variables. Thromboembolic events in the  DOAC group were 2.22% per year compared with 4.19% per year in the warfarin  group (HR, 0.28 [95% CI, 0.18–0.45]).12 However, in the INVICTUS (The  Investigation of Rheumatic AF Treatment Using VKAs, Rivaroxaban or Aspirin  Studies) RCT,1 patients with AF, rheumatic heart disease, and mitral stenosis had  a mean survival time to a primary outcome event of stroke, systemic embolism,  MI, or death from vascular or unknown cause of 1 675 days if treated with a  VKA compared with 1 599 days if with rivaroxaban (difference, −76 days [95%  CI, −121 to −31]; P<0.001). et al. Page 57 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

2. Although patients with moderate to severe mitral stenosis or mechanical valve  were excluded from DOAC trials, other forms of VHD were allowed, such  as aortic stenosis or mitral regurgitation. Bioprosthetic valves and valve repair  were allowed in the edoxaban (ENGAGE AF) and apixaban (ARISTOTLE)  trials, and valve repair in the rivaroxaban (ROCKET AF) trial. A systematic  review13 of patients with VHD (other than moderate to severe mitral stenosis or  mechanical valve) concluded that DOACs were safe. A meta-analysis confirmed  that DOACs decreased the risk of stroke/systemic embolism compared with  warfarin in patients with (HR, 0.70 [95% CI, 0.58–0.86]) and without VHD  (HR, 0.84 [95% CI, 0.75–0.95]).14 However, for patients with mechanical heart  valves,15 the RE-ALIGN (Randomized, Phase II Study to Evaluate the Safety  and Pharmacokinetics of Oral Dabigatran Etexilate in Patients After Heart Valve  Replacement)10 trial was halted during phase II after enrolling 252 subjects due  to increased thromboembolism and bleeding in the dabigatran arm. PROACT  Xa (A Trial to Determine if Participants with an On-X Aortic Valve Can  be Maintained Safely on Apixaban) was also terminated early due to higher  thromboembolic events with apixaban in patients who were >3 months after  mechanical On-X aortic valves. 6.8.6. Anticoagulation of Typical AFL Recommendations for Anticoagulation of Typical AFL* Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 B-NR 1. For patients with AFL, anticoagulant therapy is recommended according to the same risk profile  used for AF.1–3 1 C-LD 2. In patients with AFL who undergo successful cardioversion or ablation resulting in restoration of  sinus rhythm, anticoagulation should be continued for at least 4 weeks postprocedure.1–4 1 A 3. Patients with typical AFL who have undergone successful CTI ablation and have had AF  previously detected before AFL ablation should receive ongoing oral anticoagulation postablation  as indicated for AF.5,6 1 B-NR 4. Patients with typical AFL who have undergone successful CTI ablation and are deemed to be at  high thromboembolic risk, without any known previous history of AF, should receive close follow-up  and arrhythmia monitoring to detect silent AF if they are not receiving ongoing anticoagulation in  view of significant risk of AF.7–9 2b B-NR 5. In patients with typical AFL who have undergone successful CTI ablation without any known  previous history of AF who are at high risk for development of AF (eg, LA enlargement, inducible  AF, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD], HF), it may be reasonable to prescribe longterm anticoagulation if thromboembolic risk assessment suggests high risk (>2% annual risk) for  stroke.5,10–13 *This section refers to typical right-sided (CTI-dependent) AFL. Left-sided AFLs or atrial tachycardias (ATs) that develop  after ablation of AF should be anticoagulated and managed in a manner similar to AF. “Typical” AFL is defined as either  typical counterclockwise AFL when the macroreentrant circuit is dependent on the CTI using the isthmus from the patient’s  right to left or typical clockwise AFL when the macroreentrant circuit is dependent on the CTI and uses this isthmus from  the patient’s left to right. “Atypical” AFL is not dependent on the CTI and may arise from a macroreentrant circuit in the  LA, such as perimitral or LA roof flutter or could be dependent on scar from previous ablation or surgery. Synopsis: AFL is a common atrial arrhythmia with a reported overall incidence of 88  per 100 000 person-years, and the incidence increases with age.14 AFL is 2.5 times more  et al. Page 58 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

common in men than in women, and it is significantly more likely to occur in patients with  underlying HF or COPD.14 Because of the high success rate and low recurrence rate of typical AFL after CTI  ablation, catheter ablation is often used as a first-line treatment. The high effectiveness  of CTI ablation may decrease thromboembolic risk so that many physicians may elect  to discontinue oral anticoagulation >1 month after ablation in the absence of previously  detected AF. However, the high incidence of new onset AF at some time after CTI  ablation places this practice in question. Because AF may be subclinical or asymptomatic,  patients could be at significant risk of thromboembolic events after ablation of typical AFL  depending on thromboembolic risk factors. Catheter ablation of non–CTI-dependent AFL is technically more difficult, and “atypical”  AFL or AT often occurs after AF ablation. These arrhythmias should be anticoagulated and  managed in a manner similar to AF. Recommendations in this section refer to treatment of  “typical” AFL. Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. AFL is associated with increased thromboembolic risk, but the exact risk  and benefit of oral anticoagulation are difficult to ascertain as AFL and AF  often coexist. In a population-based retrospective cohort study of patients with  typical AFL and no history of AF, stroke occurred in 4.1% of patients with  AFL compared with 1.2% of a general population-matched cohort (P<0.001).1  However, no large, randomized trials specifically address thromboembolic risks  and benefits of anticoagulation in patients who have only AFL. In patients referred for ablation of typical AFL without adequate previous appropriate  anticoagulation, and no previous history of AF, TEE showed evidence for LA thrombus  or dense spontaneous echocardiographic contrast in 3%.2 A systematic review identified  thromboembolic event rates of 0% to 6% with cardioversion, with the highest incidence of  thromboembolic events occurring 1 to 2 days postcardioversion of AFL.3 Echocardiographic  studies reported LA thrombus in 0% to 38% and spontaneous echocardiographic contrast  in 21% to 28% of cases.3 In 1 ablation study, thromboembolic events occurred in 13.9%  of patients who did not receive anticoagulation.3 Observational studies report an elevated  risk of stroke with AFL compared with a control group (RR, 1.4 [95% CI, 1.35–1.46]) and  elevated mortality risk (risk ratio, 1.9 [95% CI, 1.2–3.1]) with long-term follow-up.3 1. The incidence of embolism after cardioversion of AFL is similar to that of AF  (0.72% versus 0.46%; P=not significant).4 Atrial stunning has been noted on  TEE in patients undergoing cardioversion of AF, with partial atrial recovery 15  to 30 days and full recovery 30 to 90 days postcardioversion.15 LAA stunning  also occurs in patients with AFL, although it appears to occur at a lesser  degree than what is seen with AF.16 Although limited data are available for  AFL, 1 study demonstrated more forceful mechanical LAA contraction and  absence of spontaneous echocardiographic contrast 2 weeks after ablation of  persistent AFL, suggesting earlier recovery.17 Because LA and LAA stunning  are thought to contribute to thrombus formation and thromboembolic events after  et al. Page 59 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

cardioversion, continued anticoagulation is recommended early after conversion  to sinus rhythm. 2. In a meta-analysis, the subsequent incidence of AF after ablation of CTIdependent AFL was 34% over 14 months. However, the incidence of AF after  flutter ablation is significantly higher in patients with a history of AF before  ablation than those without AF before ablation (53% versus 23% after 16–18  months; P<0.05).5 The incidence of AF continues to increase over time in both  patients with and without previous AF.5 Oral anticoagulation reduces risk of  stroke or systemic thromboembolism in the setting of nonvalvular AF.6 Because  AF is not necessarily reduced after ablation of AFL, continued anticoagulation is  recommended based on thromboembolic risk assessment. The acute success rate  for catheter ablation typical AFL is reported to be 92% with a single procedure  and 97% with multiple procedures in a meta-analysis.18 However, the subsequent  incidence of AF occurring after ablation of CTI-dependent AFL is reported to  be 16% to 82%,5,10,11 with a higher incidence in patients with a history of  AF before ablation than those without (53% versus 23% after 16–18 months;  P<0.05).5 In 1 study, 82% of patients who underwent typical AFL ablation  experienced new-onset AF during long-term follow-up (mean, 39 months).11 3. Because of the high rate of occurrence of new-onset AF after CTI ablation,  close follow-up and monitoring are recommended. In patients undergoing AFL  ablation, the detection of AF in patients without previous AF significantly  increased with more frequent monitoring and/or longer duration of followup.7 This is especially important in patients at high risk of stroke or  thromboembolism (>2%/year). Intermittent monitoring may be performed with  ambulatory monitors or wearable devices. Alternatively, implantable devices  can provide more prolonged and continuous monitoring. Implantable cardiac  monitors have been used in multiple settings to detect AF, including after AF  ablation or in patients with cryptogenic stroke. Implantable cardiac monitors  have also been used for surveillance after AF ablation.9 4. Factors that predict AF after flutter ablation include LA enlargement,19–21  inducible AF at the time of flutter ablation,22,23 interatrial conduction time,24  prolonged HV interval,25 COPD,26 obstructive sleep apnea,20 and HATCH  (hypertension, age ≥75 years, TIA or stroke, COPD, heart failure) score.21  One study that reported new-onset AF in 38% of patients after AFL ablation  demonstrated a thromboembolic event rate of 10% during a mean follow-up of  5 years.12 In a Danish registry of patients undergoing flutter ablation, 5% of  patients suffered a stroke, and 10% died during a mean follow-up of 4 years.13 Thus, patients who undergo successful flutter ablation are not free from thromboembolic  complications during long-term follow-up, likely due to a high rate of development of  new-onset AF. et al. Page 60 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

7. RATE CONTROL 7.1. Broad Considerations for Rate Control Recommendations for Broad Considerations for Rate Control Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 B-NR 1. In patients with AF, SDM with the patient is recommended to discuss rhythm- versus rate-control  strategies (taking into consideration clinical presentation, comorbidity burden, medication profile,  and patient preferences), discuss therapeutic options, and for assessing long-term benefits.1–3 2a B-R 2. In patients with AF without HF who are candidates for select rate-control strategies, heart rate  target should be guided by underlying patient symptoms, in general aiming at a resting heart rate of  <100 to 110 bpm.2,4–6 Synopsis—Rate control is a suitable strategy for many patients with AF.1,3 A solitary  randomized trial has evaluated the optimal heart rate among patients with AF. In the RACE  II study (Rate Control Efficacy in Permanent Atrial Fibrillation: A Comparison Between  Lenient Versus Strict Rate Control II), 614 patients with permanent AF were randomly  assigned to either lenient rate control (resting heart rate <110 bpm) or strict rate control  (heart rate, <80 bpm). A difference was not seen regarding either the primary composite  outcome of death from cardiovascular causes, hospitalization for HF, stroke, systemic  embolism, bleeding, and life-threatening arrhythmic events (absolute difference of −2.0  percentage points [90% CI, −7.6 to 3.5; P<0.001] for the noninferiority margin)2 or the  secondary outcome of QOL7 at 3 years. These data suggest heart rate control intensity is not  a central determinant of clinical outcomes. However, interpretation is limited by a difference  of only 10 bpm between study groups attributable to the proportion of patients assigned to  strict control who did not achieve target rate control (32.6%; n=98/301) and because 78% of  lenient rate control participants having heart rate <100 bpm.8 In addition, because patients  with HF were underrepresented, whether the results can be extrapolated to those with HF is  unknown. Nonrandomized data focused on target heart rate among outpatients,4,9,10 as well  as those with HF,5,11–16 are divergent. Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. Rate- and rhythm-control strategies have comparable clinical outcomes in many  patients with AF. In the AFFIRM (Atrial Fibrillation Follow-up Investigation  of Rhythm Management) study, rate control was comparable to cardioversion  and antiarrhythmic drugs regarding survival (HR, 1.15 [95% CI, 0.99–1.34];  P=0.08).1 In the HOT CAFE (How to Treat Chronic Atrial Fibrillation)  trial, rate control was comparable to cardioversion and use of antiarrhythmic  drugs with respect to a composite endpoint of all-cause mortality, number of  thromboembolic events, or major bleeding (OR, 1.98 [95% CI, 0.28–22.3];  P>0.71).6 In a meta-analysis of randomized trials and observational studies  comparing rhythm with rate control, management strategies were comparable  with respect to all-cause (OR, 1.34 [95% CI, 0.89–2.02]) and cardiac mortality  (OR, 0.96 [95% CI, 0.77–1.20]) as well as stroke (OR, 0.99 [95% CI, 0.76– et al. Page 61 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

1.30]).3 Although selection of a rhythm-control therapy within a year of AF  diagnosis may be considered to reduce the risk of adverse cardiovascular  outcomes,17 early rate control may still be appropriate as a function of clinical  presentation, comorbidity burden, medication profile, and patient preferences.  In this context, providers should partner with their patients to select a valueconcordant approach within an SDM framework. 2. In RACE II, rate-control intensity (target resting heart rate, <110 bpm versus <80  bpm) did not influence cardiovascular morbidity or mortality.6,18 Rate control  (AFFIRM: goal heart rate, ≤80 bpm at rest and ≤110 bpm during a 6-minute  walk test; HOT CAFE: 70–90 bpm at rest and ≤140 bpm with moderate exercise)  has been shown to be comparable to rhythm control in a meta-analysis of 5 trials,  yet some limitation of the studies include that most patients had well-tolerated  persistent AF or high risk of recurrence, no long-term follow-up, and should  not be extrapolated to patients with paroxysmal AF, highly symptomatic, or  patients with HF.1 Observational data among outpatients and those with HF are  conflicting.4 In the ORBIT-AF trial, increasing heart rate was associated with  higher all-cause mortality9 and incident HF.10 Whether a lenient rate-control  strategy may be safely and effectively used in patients with heart failure with  preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF)5,14 or reduced fraction11–13,15,16 has also  shown conflicting results. Other populations that may benefit from a low heart  rate goal include those with rate-related cardiac dysfunction,19 ICDs,20 cardiac  resynchronization therapy,21 and tachycardia-bradycardia form of sick sinus  syndrome22 (Table 20). 7.2. Specific Pharmacological Agents for Rate Control The overall goals for rate control in patients with both acute and chronic AF with a  rapid ventricular response center on control of symptoms and the risk of developing LV  systolic dysfunction. In general, nondihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (diltiazem  and verapamil) and beta blockers are the standard of care in rate-controlling AF.  Nondihydropyridine calcium channel blockers slow conduction through the atrioventricular  node and have negative inotropic and chronotropic effects. These agents are useful in  ventricular rate control in the absence of preexcitation. They provide reasonable rate control  and also improve AF-related symptoms compared with beta blockers.1,2 Beta blockers also  slow conduction through the atrioventricular node by blocking beta-1 receptors. Digoxin is  a time-honored medication for patients with AF particularly among patients with HFrEF  due to its positive inotropic and vagotonic effects. Limited data exist directly comparing  rate-control agents, especially in the setting of long-term rate control. Selection of specific  agents should consider patient-specific characteristics and response. This section will outline  the principles of treatment for acute and long-term rate control. et al. Page 62 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

7.2.1. Acute Rate Control Recommendations for Acute Rate Control Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 B-R 1. In patients with AF with rapid ventricular response who are hemodynamically stable, beta  blockers or nondihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (verapamil, diltiazem; provided that EF  >40%) are recommended for acute rate control (Figure 17).1–4 2a B-R 2. In patients with AF with rapid ventricular response in whom beta blockers and  nondihydropyridine calcium channel blockers are ineffective or contraindicated, digoxin can  be considered for acute rate control, either alone or in combination with the aforementioned  agents.5–9 2a A 3. In patients with AF with rapid ventricular response, the addition of intravenous magnesium to  standard rate-control measures is reasonable to achieve and maintain rate control.10,11 2b B-NR 4. In patients with AF with rapid ventricular response who are critically ill and/or in  decompensated HF in whom beta blockers and nondihydropyridine calcium channel blockers  are ineffective or contraindicated, intravenous amiodarone may be considered for acute rate  control.*12,13 3: Harm B-NR 5. In patients with AF with rapid ventricular response and known moderate or severe LV systolic  dysfunction with or without decompensated HF, intravenous nondihydropyridine calcium channel  blockers should not be administered.14,15 *Consider the risk of cardioversion and stroke when using amiodarone as a rate-control agent. Synopsis: Controlling the ventricular rate in AF with a rapid ventricular response in  the acute setting can vary effectiveness for control of symptoms. It can also present  challenges, given some agents may or may not be preferable in the context of underlying  comorbidities given the myriad of contributing factors. For patients requiring intravenous  rate-control agents, hypotension and/or the presence of decompensated HF may limit use of  otherwise efficacious agents. In the acute setting, recognizing patients needing emergency  cardioversion is important. Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial investigated the safety and  efficacy of continuous intravenous diltiazem infusion for 24-hour heart rate  control during AF and AFL. Seventeen of the 23 patients (74%) receiving  diltiazem infusion and none of the 21 with placebo infusion maintained a  therapeutic response for 24 hours. Over 24 hours, patients receiving diltiazem  infusion lost response significantly more slowly than did those receiving  placebo infusion. In another RCT, patients were randomly assigned in 1:1:1  ratio to receive intravenous diltiazem, digoxin, or amiodarone for ventricular  rate control. At 24 hours, rate control was achieved in 119 of 150 patients  (79%). The time to rate control was significantly shorter among patients in  the diltiazem group, with the percentage of patients who achieved rate control  being higher in the diltiazem group (90%) than the digoxin group (74%) and  the amiodarone group (74%). A randomized, parallel, open-label study aimed  to investigate esmolol versus verapamil in the acute treatment of AF or AFL.  The heart rate significantly declined with esmolol and verapamil. Fifty percent  of esmolol-treated patients with new onset of arrhythmias converted to sinus  et al. Page 63 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

rhythm, whereas only 12% of those who received verapamil converted. Mild  hypotension was observed in both treatment groups. 2. The use of intravenous digoxin has been shown to be effective in controlling  the rate of rapid AF compared with placebo in 1 multicenter RCT.5 However,  other agents may be safer and more effective in achieving acute rate control.  Intravenous diltiazem was more effective than intravenous digoxin in 2 small  RCTs.6,7 One trial performed at an emergency department at an academic  center randomized 150 patients with AF without major comorbidities and a  ventricular rate >120 bpm in a 1:1:1 ratio to intravenous diltiazem, digoxin,  and amiodarone.6 The time to reduce the heart rate <90 bpm was significantly  shorter in the diltiazem group compared with either digoxin or amiodarone,  with fewer symptoms and shorter hospital lengths of stay. Another RCT of  30 patients randomized patients with AF and a rapid ventricular response to  either intravenous diltiazem, digoxin, or a combination of both agents. Treatment  with intravenous diltiazem significantly decreased heart rate within 5 minutes  versus 3 hours with intravenous digoxin.7 Intravenous diltiazem reduced heart  rate more rapidly than intravenous digoxin in a double-blinded RCT in 40  patients with rapid AF after CABG, with similar control at 12 to 24 hours.  In another RCT of 84 patients in rapid AF who presented to the emergency  department, intravenous amiodarone resulted in faster control of the ventricular  response compared with intravenous digoxin.8 Finally, 52 patients with rapid AF  were randomized to receive either an intravenous combination of diltiazem and  digoxin or intravenous diltiazem alone, with a more rapid and durable response  to the combination.9 3. In addition to atrioventricular nodal blockers and antiarrhythmics, intravenous  magnesium has been investigated for rate controlling rapid AF. 10,11 The  mechanism likely stems from blockade of slow inward calcium channels in  the sinoatrial and atrioventricular node, thereby slowing the heart rate and  prolonging atrioventricular conduction velocity, respectively.16 Its low adverse  effect profile and minimal toxicity make it a favorable option, often as an  adjunct to conventional therapy (ie, atrioventricular nodal blockers). A metaanalysis including 6 RCTs (n=745 patients) investigated the effectiveness  of intravenous magnesium in rate and rhythm control of rapid AF when  administered in combination with standard rate-control methods (including beta  blockers, diltiazem, verapamil, digoxin), as well as placebo. In the pooled  analysis, intravenous magnesium was superior in achieving rate control (63%  versus 40%; OR, 2.49 [95% CI, 1.80–3.45]) and modestly effective in rhythm  conversion to sinus (21% versus 14%; OR, 1.75 [95% CI, 1.08–2.84]) compared  with standard rate-control methods. Subgroup analysis showed the superiority of  a lower dose (≤5 g) (24% versus 13%; OR, 2.10 [95% CI, 1.22–3.61]) compared  with the higher dose (>5 g) (16% versus 13%; OR, 1.23 [95% CI, 0.65–2.32]) in  rhythm control when compared with placebo.10 4. Intravenous amiodarone has been shown to be effective in controlling ventricular  rates in patients who are critically ill. In a retrospective study of 38 patients  et al. Page 64 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

admitted to the intensive care unit, intravenous amiodarone was associated with  a statistically significant decrease in heart rate without decrease in BP compared  with intravenous diltiazem and digoxin.12 One study of 60 critically ill patients,  predominantly with AF, with heart rate consistently >120 bpm randomized  patients to 1 of 3 intravenous treatment regimens: diltiazem in a 25-mg bolus  followed by a continuous infusion of 20 mg/h for 24 hours; amiodarone in a  300-mg bolus; and amiodarone in a 300-mg bolus followed by 45 mg/h for 24  hours.13 A >30% rate reduction within 4 hours was not statistically different  in either treatment arm, with less effective control more frequently observed in  those receiving a bolus of amiodarone alone; thus overall, diltiazem allowed  for significantly better heart rate control over 24 hours, but it also caused a  significantly higher incidence of hypotension requiring discontinuation of the  drug. 5. Limited data exist regarding the use of nondihydropyridine calcium channel  blockers in patients with HFrEF, due to the presumed limitation of negative  inotropic effects. Two retrospective analyses highlight potential for increased  morbidity when administered in this population. In a retrospective analysis of  patients hospitalized with AF with rapid ventricular rate (RVR), diltiazem was  associated with an increased risk of acute kidney injury within 48 hours of  initiation of diltiazem in those patients with LVEF ≤50%, compared with those  with normal EF (10% versus 3.6%; P=0.002).14 An additional retrospective  analysis compared patients with HFrEF receiving either intravenous metoprolol  or diltiazem. There was a higher incidence of worsening HF symptoms  (increased oxygen requirement within 4 hours or initiation of inotropic support  with 48 hours) in those patients receiving diltiazem (33% versus 15%; P=0.019).  Neither analysis noted an increase in the in-hospital mortality rate, need for a  higher level of care, or hypotension. 7.2.2. Long-Term Rate Control Recommendations for Long-Term Rate Control Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 B-NR 1. In patients with AF, beta blockers or nondihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (diltiazem,  verapamil) are recommended for long-term rate control with the choice of agent according to  underlying substrate and comorbid conditions.1,2 2a B-NR 2. For patients with AF in whom measuring serum digoxin levels is indicated, it is reasonable to  target levels <1.2 ng/mL.3–6 2a B-R 3. In patients with AF and HF symptoms, digoxin is reasonable for long-term rate control  in combination with other rate-controlling agents, or as monotherapy if other agents are not  preferred, not tolerated, or contraindicated.7–9 3: Harm C-LD 4. In patients with AF and LVEF <40%, nondihydropyridine calcium channel–blocking drugs  should not be administered given their potential to exacerbate HF.10,11 3: Harm B-R 5. In patients with permanent AF who have risk factors for cardiovascular events, dronedarone  should not be used for long-term rate control.12 et al. Page 65 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Synopsis: Both nondihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (verapamil and diltiazem) and  beta blockers are effective for long-term rate control. These agents are useful in ventricular  rate control in the absence of preexcitation. Digoxin may be useful in patients with limited  tolerability to other agents, or as adjunct therapy in patients with a difficult to control  ventricular rate. Limited data exist comparing various rate control agents, especially in the  setting of chronic rate control. Selection of specific agents should consider patient-specific  characteristics (ie, HFrEF, reactive airway disease) and response (Figure 18). Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. One prospective, randomized, investigator-blinded, crossover study compared the  effect of 4 rate-reducing once-daily drug regimens on the ventricular heart rate  and arrhythmia-related symptoms in patients with permanent AF. The 24-hour  mean heart rate was 96±12 bpm at baseline (no treatment), 75±10 bpm with  diltiazem, 81±11 bpm with verapamil, 82±11 bpm with metoprolol, and 84±11  bpm with carvedilol. All drugs significantly reduced the heart rate compared  with baseline.13 In a retrospective cohort study, investigators used a database  from 2 urban emergency departments to identify consecutive patients with  emergency department discharge diagnoses of AF. A total of 259 consecutive  patients were enrolled, with 100 receiving calcium channel blockers and 159  receiving beta blockers. Baseline demographics and comorbidities were similar.  Twenty-seven percent of patients taking beta blockers were admitted, 31.0%  of patients taking calcium channel blockers were admitted, and there were no  significant differences in emergency department length of stay, adverse events,  or 7- or 30-day emergency department revisits. A follow-up analysis of the  AFFIRM study examined the difference in all hospitalization and all-cause  mortality in participants treated with a single rate-control agent at baseline.  No difference was found among those participants receiving beta blockers,  nondihydropyridine calcium channel blockers, or digoxin.2 2. Seminal work investigating digoxin toxicity was based on a small series of  patients, where toxicity was determined by electrocardiographic abnormalities.14  Toxicity was seen when serum digoxin concentrations exceeded 2.0 ng/mL, and  almost certainly at levels >3.0 ng/mL. Based on this small study, the narrow  therapeutic range of digoxin is usually cited as 0.8 to 2.0 ng/mL, with substantial  variation across institutional laboratories and published references.15,16 However,  3 post hoc analyses of the DIG (Digitalis Investigation Group) trial suggested  that safe use of digoxin is seen at lower serum concentrations.4–6 Serum digoxin  concentrations of 0.5 to 0.9 ng/mL were associated with significantly lower allcause mortality rates and hospitalizations compared with concentrations ≥1.0 ng/ mL.3 Another analysis suggested that serum digoxin concentrations >1.2 ng/mL  may be harmful, particularly in women.7 A post hoc analysis comparing patients  with AF taking digoxin with propensity score-matched controls suggested that  patients with serum digoxin concentrations <0.9 ng/mL had no increased risk  of death, concentrations of 0.9 to 1.1 ng/mL had a nonsignificant increased risk  of death, and serum digoxin concentrations ≥1.2 ng/mL were associated with a  et al. Page 66 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

significant (56%) increased risk of death.4 Serum digoxin concentrations of 0.5  to 0.8 ng/mL seem safest in terms of benefit without adverse effects in patients  with HFrEF.17 3. Digoxin may have added efficacy as rate control in conjunction with beta  blockers in patients with AF. A small RCT of 47 patients with persistent  AF and concomitant HFrEF compared the effects of digoxin alone, carvedilol  alone, and their combination.10 Combination therapy was significantly associated  with better rate control and symptom relief than monotherapy with either  agent. The RATE-AF trial randomized 160 patients with persistent AF and  concomitant HFrEF to digoxin and bisoprolol.11 No significant differences in  the primary endpoint of QOL were noted at 6 months with either agent. Several  secondary outcomes, including N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide level,  were significantly lower in the digoxin group, without a significant difference  in resting heart rate between the 2 groups at 12 months. Adverse effects were  less common in the digoxin group. A large meta-analysis of 75 studies and  approximately 620 000 patients found a significantly increased risk of death in  digoxin users overall but, when limited to 7 RCTs (~8400 patients), no difference  in mortality rate was observed between digoxin or placebo—of note, these 7  RCTs in the subanalysis were in patients with concomitant HF.9 A post hoc  sensitivity analysis assessing the impact of digoxin on mortality in patients with  HF and concomitant AF found no impact on overall mortality in patients taking  digoxin, most with HFrEF. 4. MDPIT (Multicenter Diltiazem Postinfarction Trial) demonstrated an association  of worsening HF in patients with a recent MI, with LV dysfunction randomized  to diltiazem. Among those with a baseline EF of <40%, late HF appeared in  significantly more patients receiving diltiazem compared with placebo (21%  versus 12%; P=0.004). Life table analysis in patients with an EF of <40%  confirmed significantly more frequent late HF in those taking diltiazem. In  addition, the diltiazem-associated rise in the frequency of late congestive heart  failure (CHF) was progressively greater with increasingly severe decrements in  baseline EF.10 5. The safety and efficacy of dronedarone, originally designed as an antiarrhythmic  to maintain sinus rhythm in patients with AF, was addressed in several seminal  trials.18–20 PALLAS (Palbociclib Collaborative Adjuvant Study) was designed  to investigate whether dronedarone would reduce major vascular events or  hospitalizations in patients with permanent AF. The benefits of dronedarone  in patients with permanent AF were initially suggested from the ERATO  (Efficacy and Safety of Dronedarone for the Control of ventricular rate during  atrial fibrillation) trial, which showed a significant reduction in the ventricular  response for patients with paroxysmal and permanent AF in the 24-hour setting,  which were carried forward in a 6-month follow-up.12 PALLAS randomized  approximately 3200 patients with permanent AF at high risk for adverse events.  The trial was terminated early, because of the strong signal for harm in 43  et al. Page 67 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

patients receiving dronedarone versus 19 receiving placebo, namely death (13/21  due to arrhythmia), stroke, and hospitalization for HF.12 7.3. Atrioventricular Nodal Ablation (AVNA) Recommendations for A VNA Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 C-LD 1. In patients with AF and a persistently rapid ventricular response who undergo A VNA, initial  pacemaker lower rate programming should be 80 to 90 bpm to reduce the risk of sudden death.1,2 2a B-R 2. In patients with AF and uncontrolled rapid ventricular response refractory to rate-control  medications (who are not candidates for or in whom rhythm control has been unsuccessful), A VNA  can be useful to improve symptoms and QOL.3–6 1 B-NR 3. In patients with AF who are planned to undergo A VNA, implantation of a pacemaker before the  ablation (ie, before or same day of ablation) is recommended to ensure adequacy of the pacing leads  before performing ablation.7–9 2b C-LD 4. In patients with AF with normal EF undergoing A VNA, conduction system pacing of the His  bundle10–13 or left bundle area12,13 may be reasonable. Synopsis—A VNA provides ventricular rate control effectively and without medications  yet creates dependence on pacing.3 Consideration of the consequences of lifelong  pacemaker implantation, particularly with respect to age and comorbidities, is central to  decision-making regarding benefit. Small RCTs of A VNA and right ventricular pacing (RVP) have shown improvements in  symptoms and QOL compared with medical rate control alone but found no significant  differences in EF or other measures of cardiac performance.3,14 Progression to persistent  AF is described in many patients with previously paroxysmal AF after A VNA.15,16  Antiarrhythmic drugs reduce the transition to permanent AF but do not improve QOL or  echocardiographic parameters, and patients treated with antiarrhythmic drugs have more  episodes of HF and hospitalizations.17 Early concerns regarding A VNA included risks for device-related complications, sudden  cardiac death, and worsened HF. Deaths due to malignant arrhythmias have been nearly  eradicated by programming higher lower-rate pacing in the early postprocedure period.1,2,18  The risks of HF may be ameliorated by non-RVP strategies, but data are limited in patients  who do not have HF before A VNA.19 Overall, long-term data on outcomes after A VNA are limited, and no evidence supports  A VNA as first-line therapy.9 Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. Early observational studies showed a concerning incidence of sudden death  after A VNA in 3% to 7% of patients.20,21 This immediate postprocedural risk  results from ventricular fibrillation (VF) predominantly due to bradycardia,  QT prolongation, and heterogeneity of repolarization. Initiation of VF is often  pause dependent or occurs during a relatively slow pacing rate.18 Deaths due  et al. Page 68 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

to malignant arrhythmias have been minimized by current protocols specifying  higher lower-rate pacing in patients after A VNA in the early postprocedure  period.1,2,18 Subsequent lower rate adjustment is performed over the course of  several weeks. 2. A VNA and pacemaker implantation provide safe and effective rate control in  the fraction of patients with AF who cannot be effectively rate controlled with  medical therapy3,4,22 and in whom sinus rhythm has failed or is not deemed to  be effective. A meta-analysis of 6 small RCTs of studies comparing A VNA  and pacemaker versus medical therapy or medical therapy with pacemaker  including 323 subjects with paroxysmal or persistent AF showed improvement  in symptoms and QOL in the A VNA group.6 No differences in survival, stroke,  hospitalization, EF, or exercise capacity were found. There was no effect of  A VNA on all-cause mortality in a pooled analysis.6 Nonrandomized studies have  shown improvement in a range of clinical outcomes5 in addition to data showing  improved EF in patients with suspected tachycardia-related cardiomyopathy after  A VNA.23 These favorable findings in nonrandomized studies are likely subject  to the placebo effect of device implantation. Early and late complication rates  are not inconsequential, specifically in young patients in view of the risk of  pacemaker-mediated cardiomyopathy, and long-term follow-up data are scant.9 3. Although few studies concerning A VNA and pacing report complication rates  for the pacemaker implant, the overall risk of lead dislodgement or failure is  approximately 2%, and many operators perform both A VNA and pacemaker  implant during the same procedure.9,13,24 Practice patterns vary, however, and a  European survey indicated up to 80% of operators will choose to perform A VNA  1 to 3 months after pacemaker implantation to reduce risk of adverse outcome  due to early lead dislodgement.25 In the prospective FOLLOWPACE registry  from 23 centers in the Netherlands, lead dislodgment was the most frequent  lead-related complication, occurring in 3.3% of patients within the first 2 months  of implant.7 Relevant to the older age population usually undergoing A VNA,  a pooled patient-level analysis of 4814 subjects from CTOPP (Canadian Trial  of Physiologic Pacing), UKPACE (United Kingdom pacing and cardiovascular  events), and Danish pacing trials—designed to compare pacemaker implantation  complication rates in age <75 years versus age ≥75 years—found a higher risk  of early complications in those age ≥75 years (5% versus 3%), driven by a  higher rate of lead dislodgement (2%) and pneumothorax (1.6%).8 If A VNA  and pacing are performed concomitantly, ideally, leads should be placed first to  ensure adequate lead function. 4. HF after A VNA is attributed to the deleterious effects of RVP,26 and risk  is correlated with baseline cardiac function.9 The PA VE (Post A V Nodal  Ablation Evaluation) trial compared outcomes in patient with persistent AF and  uncontrolled rates undergoing A VNA and RVP with A VNA and biventricular  pacing (BiVP) and found an improvement in 6-minute walk test and EF, but  benefit was predominantly seen in subjects with EF <45% or New York Heart  Association (NYHA) class II to III HF at baseline.27 Not all patients appear to be  et al. Page 69 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

at high risk of HF after A VNA and RVP.28 Because the benefit is less and the risk  of complications is higher in BiVP compared with conventional pacing, RVP is  advised in patients with preserved EF undergoing A VNA.19 Conduction system pacing of the His bundle or left bundle area offers promise to reduce the  risk of RVP-induced cardiomyopathy and improve outcomes. Early studies have justifiably  focused on patients with HF undergoing A VNA, and limited data are available in patients  with preserved EF and no HF diagnosis.27 His bundle pacing with A VNA has been shown to  be feasible and associated with improvements in EF in patients with EF <40%, and NYHA  class, albeit with elevated pacing thresholds.10,11 Left bundle area pacing may deliver the  advantages of His bundle pacing with reduced risk of elevated pacing thresholds or lead  dislodgement.12 Early studies have shown stable EF with conduction system pacing and  A VNA in follow-up, and improvement in patients with EF <50%.12,24 8. RHYTHM CONTROL 8.1. Goals of Therapy With Rhythm Control Recommendations for Goals of Therapy With Rhythm Control Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 B-R 1. In patients with reduced LV function and persistent (or high burden) AF, a trial of rhythm control  should be recommended to evaluate whether AF is contributing to the reduced LV function.1–6 2a B-R 2. In patients with symptomatic AF, rhythm control can be useful to improve symptoms.7–11 2a B-R 3. In patients with a recent diagnosis of AF (<1 year), rhythm control can be useful to reduce  hospitalizations, stroke, and mortality.12–14 2a B-R 4. In patients with AF and HF, rhythm control can be useful for improving symptoms and improving  outcomes, such as mortality and hospitalizations for HF and ischemia.15–19 2a B-NR 5. In patients with AF, rhythm-control strategies can be useful to reduce the likelihood of AF  progression.20–27 2b C-LD 6. In patients with AF where symptoms associated with AF are uncertain, a trial of rhythm control  (eg, cardioversion or pharmacological therapy) may be useful to determine what if any symptoms are  attributable to AF.28–32 2b B-NR 7. In patients with AF, rhythm-control strategies may be useful to reduce the likelihood of  development of dementia or worsening cardiac structural abnormalities.33–45 Synopsis—When caring for a patient with AF, deciding between rhythm and rate control  is important but critical to acknowledge that the decision is nuanced, can evolve over time,  and that the 2 strategies are necessarily not mutually exclusive depending on the definition  used. For example, in EAST-AFNET 4 (Early Treatment of Atrial Fibrillation for Stroke  Prevention Trial), which randomized patients with recently identified AF to rhythm- or  rate-control strategies, in those patients randomized to the rhythm control arm, initially  87% were treated with antiarrhythmic drugs and 8% with AF ablation; but, at 2 years,  35% were not on antiarrhythmic drugs or had received AF ablation.12 Similarly, although  the decision on whether to use rhythm control is often based on symptoms, in a post hoc  analysis of the same trial, benefits in the composite outcome of death, stroke, or cardiac  hospitalization was observed in all patients regardless of whether symptoms were present  et al. Page 70 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

or not.30 Data from EAST-AFNET 4 and large registries have consistently demonstrated  the importance of monitoring patients for increased AF burden once AF has been identified  and that rhythm-control therapies are more likely to be successful when implemented early  when AF burden begins to increase.13,14,30,46,47 Finally, for all patients with AF, continued  long-term management of modifiable risk factors is essential.48 Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. AF and reduced LV function are often recognized in the same patient, with  the combination being associated with worse prognosis when compared with  patients with either HF or AF alone.1,49 Several studies have demonstrated  improved LV function in patients with AF after restoration of sinus rhythm.2– 6 The incidence of AF or other atrial arrhythmias as an important contributor  to reduced LVEF is unknown and likely dependent on arrhythmia burden,  ventricular rates, and other factors.4–6 However, in patients who present with  both AF and reduced LV function or develop reduced LV function after an initial  diagnosis of AF, where no identifiable cause for the reduced LV function is  observed, AF should initially be assumed as a very possible cause until proven  otherwise. Although AF as a cause for reduced LV function is usually considered  in the setting of rapid ventricular rates, improved LV function with rhythm  control has been reported in the setting of AF with relatively well controlled  heart rates.2,3 2. Rhythm and rate control can improve symptoms in AF.7,8,50,51 Multiple studies  have shown improved QOL with rhythm control.7–9,50,51 Continued symptoms  due to AF are common with rate control. In the RACE II study, lenient rate  control had similar primary outcomes (a combination of cardiovascular death,  hospitalization for HF, and several other endpoints) compared to strict rate  control, but at the end of the follow-up period (>2 years), 46% of patients in  both groups had continued symptoms associated with AF.10 Although a different  population, symptoms due to recurrent AF were identified in 56 of 303 (18%)  patients with newly identified AF undergoing rhythm control with either AADs  or catheter ablation.11 3. EAST-AFNET 4 randomized 2733 patients with early onset AF (<1 year)  and other risk factors for stroke to rhythm control or rate-control strategies.12  Rhythm control was associated with a 25% reduction in the combined endpoint  of mortality rate, stroke, and hospitalizations due to HF or ACS. In 2  observational studies, 1 from claims data and another from a large national  database, when compared with rate control, early initiation of rhythm control (<1  year) in patients with AF was associated with 15% and 19% reductions in the  combined endpoint of cardiovascular death, ischemic stroke, or hospitalization  for ischemia or HF, respectively.13,14 However, these recent findings must be  balanced against studies that have reported increased emergency department  visits and health care resource utilization associated with rhythm control.52–54 4. In the AF-CHF (Atrial Fibrillation and Congestive Heart Failure) trial, rhythm  control did not affect cardiovascular mortality but was associated with improved  et al. Page 71 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

QOL.15,55 Contemporary trials in patients with AF and HF, regardless of LV  function, and often using catheter ablation as an important therapy, have reported  trends or statistically significant improvement in clinical outcomes associated  with rhythm control when compared to rate control.16,17,49,56–58 In an analysis  of patients with HF in EAST-AFNET 4, rhythm control was associated with a  significant reduction in the composite primary endpoint of cardiovascular death,  stroke, or hospitalization due to HF or acute ischemic syndrome (HR, 0.74  [95% CI, 0.56–0.97]; P=0.03).16 Similarly, in the CABANA (Catheter Ablation  vs Antiarrhythmic Drug Therapy for Atrial Fibrillation) trial, catheter ablationbased rhythm control was associated with a 46% reduction in the mortality  rate in patients with HF compared with medical therapy.19 Although catheter  ablation is more effective in maintaining sinus rhythm than antiarrhythmic drugs,  maintenance of sinus rhythm was higher in the AF-CHF trial. In this study,  amiodarone was the preferential strategy for rhythm control (82% of patients)  compared with the ablation-based CASTLE-AF (Catheter Ablation versus  Standard Conventional Therapy in Patients with Left Ventricular Dysfunction  and Atrial Fibrillation) trial (sinus rhythm at study completion: AF-CHF: 75%  versus CASTLE-AF: 66%), and additionally the benefit of rhythm control in  patients with HF is likely greatest in those patients with recently identified  AF.15–18,49 5. AF commonly, but not always, progresses overtime to higher burdens and  becomes more sustained.20,59 Large registry studies have reported that AF  progression is more commonly observed with a rate-control strategy compared  to a rhythm-control strategy over a 1- to 2-year period, although the absolute  magnitude and difference has varied. For example, in 2 registry studies,  progression to a more sustained form of AF burden was observed in 26% to  28% of patients undergoing a rate-control strategy compared with 6% to 11%  of patients treated with a rhythm-control strategy while, in an analysis of the  ORBIT AF trial, although rhythm control was associated with a lower likelihood  of progression, AF progression was much more common regardless of strategy  (66% for rate control and 56% for rhythm control) likely due to older patients in  this cohort.21–23 AF progression is a complex process, and although the choice  between rhythm-control and rate-control strategy has an impact, many other  factors such as age, presence or absence of HF or other comorbidities, LA size,  heart rate, and modifiable risk factors are also important.21–27 6. The reported prevalence of asymptomatic AF varies from 10% to 40% depending  on study cohort.28 Asymptomatic and symptomatic patients with AF have similar  risks for death and stroke.28,29 In a post hoc analysis of EAST-AFNET 4,  similar magnitudes of benefit were observed in symptomatic and asymptomatic  patients for reducing the combined endpoint of cardiovascular death, stroke,  and hospitalization for HF.30 Nevertheless, the evidence base for the benefits  of a rhythm-control trial in asymptomatic patients with sinus rhythm is limited.  Improved energy with return to sinus rhythm was noted in 1 observational study  of 13 asymptomatic patients with persistent AF.31 In another study that included  et al. Page 72 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

18 asymptomatic patients, at 1-month follow-up, no patients had improvement in  symptoms, although sinus rhythm was maintained in only 35% of patients.32 In 2  small studies that focused on the impact of catheter ablation in asymptomatic  patients, maintenance of sinus rhythm was associated with improved QOL  indices in all patients, but 24% to 34% of patients developed symptoms mainly  due to AT after the ablation procedure.53,54 7. AF is associated with increased cognitive impairment, progressive increase in  AF burden, and structural changes in the heart.33,34 Nonrandomized studies  from registries or post hoc analyses of randomized trials have reported that  rhythm control is associated with a reduction in the incidence of dementia  and development of HF.36–38 Furthermore, AF can also be an etiologic  reason for mitral regurgitation or tricuspid regurgitation.39–45 In 1 study of  53 patients referred for AF ablation with moderate mitral regurgitation or  worse, maintenance of sinus rhythm at follow-up was associated with significant  decreases in LA size, mitral annular dilatation, and mitral regurgitation.39 In  another study, 70% of patients undergoing ablation for AF who maintained sinus  rhythm at follow-up had improvement in mitral regurgitation.40 Similar results  have been found in tricuspid valve function as assessed by echocardiography.42– 45 8.2. Electrical and Pharmacological Cardioversion Cardioversion to restore sinus rhythm is a mode of acute rhythm control. Cardioversion can  be achieved electrically or pharmacologically. Electrical cardioversion, given rapidity and  efficacy, is the treatment of choice for patients with hemodynamic instability attributable  to AF. Acute rhythm control with cardioversion should also be considered for patients  with hemodynamically stable AF intolerant of atrioventricular dyssynchrony, loss of atrial  kick, or unable to achieve adequate rate control. In patients with hemodynamically stable  AF, both electrical cardioversion and pharmacological cardioversion are acceptable, safe,  and efficacious methods for acute rhythm control.1–3 Electrical cardioversion is more  effective than pharmacological cardioversion alone4,5 but involves the trade-off of anesthesia  or sedation.6 Thromboembolic risks and considerations for anticoagulation apply to both  pharmacological cardioversion and electrical cardioversion.7,8 8.2.1. Prevention of Thromboembolism in the Setting of Cardioversion Recommendations for Prevention of Thromboembolism in the Setting of Cardioversion Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 B-R 1. In patients with AF duration of ≥48 hours, a 3-week duration of uninterrupted therapeutic  anticoagulation or imaging evaluation to exclude intracardiac thrombus is recommended before  elective cardioversion.1 1 B-NR 2. In patients with AF undergoing cardioversion, therapeutic anticoagulation should be established  before cardioversion and continued for at least 4 weeks afterwards without interruption to prevent  thromboembolism.2–7 et al. Page 73 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

COR LOE Recommendations 1 C-LD 3. In patients with AF in whom cardioversion is deferred due to LAA thrombus detected on  precardioversion imaging, therapeutic anticoagulation should be instituted for at least 3 to 6 weeks,  after which imaging should be repeated before cardioversion.1,8 2b B-NR 4. In patients with AF and previous LAAO who are not on anticoagulation, imaging evaluation to  assess the adequacy of LAAO and exclude device-related thrombosis before cardioversion may be  reasonable.9–19 2b C-LD 5. In patients with AF and previous LAAO with residual leak, pericardioversion anticoagulation may  be considered and continued thereafter.9–11,20 2b C-LD 6. In patients with reported AF duration of <48 hours (not in the setting of cardiac surgery) and  who are not on anticoagulation, precardioversion imaging to exclude intracardiac thrombus may  be considered ins those who are at elevated thromboembolic risk (CHA2DS2-V ASc score ≥2 or  equivalent).21,22 2b C-LD 7. In patients with low thromboembolic risks (CHA2DS2-V ASc 0–1 or equivalent) and AF duration  of <12 hours, the benefit of precardioversion imaging or pericardioversion anticoagulation is  uncertain given the low incidence of pericardioversion thromboembolic events in this population.21,22 Synopsis: Thromboembolic risks and considerations of anticoagulation apply to both  pharmacological cardioversion and electrical cardioversion.23,24 Thromboembolic risks  in the setting of acute cardioversion relate to preexisting thrombus, change in atrial  mechanical function with restoration of sinus rhythm, atrial stunning postcardioversion, and  transient prothrombotic state.2,25 DOACs are alternatives to VKAs as thromboprophylaxis  in the setting of cardioversion.26–29 Given additional favorable attributes of rapid time  to therapeutic efficacy, reliability of maintenance of therapeutic efficacy, and ease of  continuation, DOACs may be preferentially considered over VKAs for patients with AF  planned for cardioversion barring contraindications to DOAC therapy. Precardioversion  imaging is prudent for patients with AF who have previously undergone LAAO and are  not on anticoagulation.9,10,14–16,19 Thromboembolic risks for patients with <48 hours of  AF were not homogenous but, rather, varied by a patient’s risk profile for thromboembolic  complications (as defined by risk scores in specific studies) and duration of AF.21,22 More  nuanced consideration of a patient’s thromboembolic risks in the setting of cardioversion for  AF may integrate a patient’s substrate for atrial myopathy and risks for thromboembolism  instead of strict dependence on the previously used 48-hour duration threshold. Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. Early experience with both pharmacological and then electrical cardioversion of  AF led to the observation that thromboembolism was less frequent in patients  who were chronically anticoagulated than those who were not.30 This led to an  empiric recommendation for 3 weeks of anticoagulation before cardioversion in  the prospective, randomized, multicenter ACUTE (Assessment of Cardioversion  Using Tranesophageal Echocardiography) study of patients with >2 days’  duration of AF.31 Precardioversion anticoagulation of at least 3 weeks may be  accomplished via either therapeutic anticoagulation with VKAs or DOACs.26– 28 Cardiac computed tomography, particularly with delayed contrast-enhanced  image acquisition protocol, has emerged as an alternate imaging modality to  exclude intracardiac thrombus.32–34 et al. Page 74 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

2. Rationales for establishment of therapeutic anticoagulation before cardioversion  and continuation for the subsequent 4 weeks after cardioversion for AF are  driven by elevated thromboembolic risks,6,7,35 high early recurrence of AF,36 and  observation of atrial dysfunction2–5 during this period. Thromboembolic risks  are elevated around the time of cardioversion, especially within the 30 days after  cardioversion.6,7 The observation of spontaneous echocardiographic contrast in  association with atrial dysfunction on TEE after cardioversion raised mechanistic  concerns for atrial stunning in the setting of cardioversion,2,3 with recovery of  mechanical atrial systole over the ensuing 1 month.4,5 Rapidity of recovery of  mechanical atrial systole may be influenced by clinical variables,37 duration of  the antecedent AF episode leading to cardioversion,5 and the extent of comorbid  conditions as risks factors for atrial myopathy.38 3. In patients with AF, detection of intracardiac thrombus should prompt  cancellation of planned cardioversion and institution of therapeutic  anticoagulation in anticoagulant-naïve patients. Detection of intracardiac  thrombus in patients already on anticoagulation should prompt assessment of  compliance, dosing appropriateness, drug absorption, and drug interactions. In  patients with thrombus detected despite already being anticoagulated, potential  reasons should be investigated, such as nonadherence and drug interaction, which  may cause subtherapeutic levels. Switching to an alternate anticoagulant can  be considered, although the benefit is uncertain. In anticoagulant-naïve patients,  61.2% had resolution of thrombus on follow-up TEE performed 3 to 12 weeks  after initiation of VKA in the CLOT-AF (Retrospective Registry Providing  Baseline Data on the Outcome of Left Atrial [LA] or LA Appendage [LAA]  Thrombus in Patients With Nonvalvular Atrial Fibrillation [AF] or Atrial Flutter  After Standard of Care [SoC] Anticoagulant Therapy) study, and 41.5% had  resolution of thrombus on follow-up TEE performed 6 weeks after therapy  with rivaroxaban in the X-TRA (Exploring the Efficacy of Once Daily Oral  Rivaroxaban for Treatment of Thrombus in Left Atrial/Left Atrial Appendage  in Subjects With Nonvalvular Atrial Fibrillation or Atrial Flutter) study.8 Repeat  imaging (TEE or computed tomography32–34) is generally pursued after at least 3  to 6 weeks of therapeutic anticoagulation to assess for resolution of intracardiac  thrombus before reconsidering cardioversion.1,8 4. In the subset of patients who have undergone surgical or pLAAO procedures,  inadequate occlusion may be seen acutely during the procedure or delayed after  the procedure.9–14 Inadequate LAAO has been associated with elevated risks  for thromboembolism.9–11 Device-related thrombosis, reported in patients with  pLAAO devices,15–19 has also been associated with elevated stroke/systemic  embolism.15–18 Imaging with TEE or cardiac computed tomography can  assess adequacy of LAAO, residual leak, and device-related thrombosis.39–41  In the setting of transesophageal echocardiographic imaging before electrical  cardioversion, device-related thrombus was detected in 2.7% (4 of 148 patients)  of a small multicenter retrospective analysis of patients with Watchman LAAO  device.20 These 4 patients were treated with oral anticoagulation and after 6  et al. Page 75 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

to 8 weeks, on confirmation of thrombus resolution by repeat TEE, underwent  successful electrical cardioversion.20 5. Data are limited to guide pericardioversion anticoagulation in patients with  LAAO. In the broader (not limited to cardioversion) context, residual leak  ≤5 mm by computed tomography after LAAO by surgical ligation has been  associated with particularly elevated stroke/system embolism risks (especially  in the absence of anticoagulation)9 and similarly for residual leak <5 mm  by TEE post-Lariat.10 A large analysis that stratified National Cardiovascular  Data Registry LAAO registry Watchman 2.5 device patients by transesophageal  echocardiographic observation of residual leak (none, ≤5 mm, >5 mm) at 45  days, found ≤5 mm residual leak to be common (13 258 of 51 333 patients;  25.8%) and associated with modestly higher incidence of thromboembolic events  over 1-year follow-up compared with no leak.11 OAC use was more frequent  in patients with large (>5 mm) residual leak.11 Data specific to the setting  of cardioversion are further limited. The largest to date is a retrospective  multicenter study of 148 Watchman LAAO device patients who underwent  electrical cardioversion after precardioversion exclusion of intracardiac thrombus  or large residual leak (≥5 mm in this study) by TEE.20 No thromboembolic  events were observed within 6 weeks of cardioversion, in recipients or  nonrecipients of pericardioversion anticoagulation.20 However, detection of  thromboembolic events may be limited by study’s sample size. Pericardioversion  antithrombotic regimen was at the discretion of the treating physicians,20 and the  relationship of anticoagulation with presence/absence of small residual leak was  not reported. Considerations for anticoagulation may also vary based on specific  surgical or pLAAO procedures and devices. 6. The safety of cardioversion without further assessment or previous  anticoagulation in patients with AF duration of <48 hours has been challenged.  In addition to concerns for underestimation of actual duration of episode  and burden due to potential for asymptomatic occurrence of AF, emerging  data demonstrate that thromboembolic risks in patients with <48 hours of  AF were not homogenously low. Time to cardioversion >12 hours has been  reported as an independent predictor for thromboembolic complications.21 A  single-center observational study of patients undergoing cardioversion for AF  of <48 hours duration did not observe thromboembolic events in patients  with CHA2DS2-V ASc score of 0 or 1 or patients with postoperative AF but  noted differential thromboembolic rates in CHA2DS2-V ASc score ≥2.42 Larger  studies similarly demonstrated that among patients with <48 hours of AF,  postcardioversion thromboembolic risks increased with increasing CHA2DS2V ASc score,22,43 especially in those with CHA2DS2-V ASc score ≥2 in the  absence of anticoagulation.22 7. Retrospective observational data from the FinCV (Finnish CardioVersion) study  noted low incidence of 30-day pericardioversion thromboembolic event rate  of 0.4% in patients with AF with CHA2DS2-V ASc of 0 to 122 or 0.3% in  patients with duration of <12 hours of AF.21 Other retrospective studies have  et al. Page 76 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

similarly demonstrated low pericardioversion thromboembolic risks in patients  with CHA2DS2-V ASc score of 0 to 1.42 The combination of CHA2DS2-V ASc of  0 to 1 in conjunction with duration of <12 hours of AF may identify a population  at particularly low risk for pericardioversion thromboembolism. 8.2.2. Electrical Cardioversion Recommendations for Electrical Cardioversion Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 C-LD 1. In patients with hemodynamic instability attributable to AF, immediate electrical cardioversion  should be performed to restore sinus rhythm.1 1 B-R 2. In patients with AF who are hemodynamically stable, electrical cardioversion can be performed as  initial rhythm-control strategy or after unsuccessful pharmacological cardioversion.2 1 C-LD 3. In patients with AF undergoing electrical cardioversion, energy delivery should be confirmed to be  synchronized to the QRS to reduce the risk of inducing VF.3 2a B-R 4. For patients with AF undergoing elective electrical cardioversion, the use of biphasic energy of at  least 200 J as initial energy can be beneficial to improve success of initial electrical shock.4,5 2a B-NR 5. In patients with AF undergoing elective cardioversion, with longer duration of AF or unsuccessful  initial shock, optimization of electrode vector, use of higher energy, and pretreatment with  antiarrhythmic drugs can facilitate success of electrical cardioversion.5–9 2b C-LD 6. In patients with obesity and AF, use of manual pressure augmentation and/or further escalation of  electrical energy may be beneficial to improve success of electrical cardioversion.10 Synopsis: Electrical cardioversion is a strategy for acute rhythm control. Compared with  pharmacological cardioversion alone, electrical cardioversion with synchronized direct  current cardioversion is more rapid and efficacious for restoring sinus rhythm from  AF.1,11,12 Given rapidity and efficacy, electrical cardioversion is the treatment of choice  for patients with hemodynamically unstable AF. In hemodynamically stable patients with AF planned for acute rhythm control, electrical  cardioversion can be performed as an initial strategy or after unsuccessful pharmacological  cardioversion.2,6,13,14 Electrical cardioversion is favored over pharmacological cardioversion  when the patient is able to tolerate sedation, desires more immediate rhythm conversion, or  has failed or not met candidacy for pharmacological cardioversion. Although electrical cardioversion may achieve acute restoration of sinus rhythm, durability  of sinus rhythm may be influenced by ongoing acute conditions, LA size, duration of the  history of AF and/or specific episode, and comorbidities.14 In patients with a longer duration  of AF, immediate recurrence of AF, a previous unsuccessful electrical cardioversion,  or a desire to employ all reasonable efforts to avoid an AF recurrence, pretreatment  antiarrhythmic drugs and subsequent continuation to facilitate success of acute cardioversion  and promote maintenance of sinus rhythm postcardioversion6,8,9 may be pursued in the  context of SDM with the patient. Optimization of energy delivery, electrode vector, and  reduction of transthoracic impedance with manual pressure augmentation may also improve  success of electrical cardioversion.5–10 et al. Page 77 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. In patients with hemodynamically unstable AF, immediate electrical  cardioversion with synchronized direct current cardioversion is the treatment of  choice. Direct data on emergency cardioversion of hemodynamically unstable  patients is limited because of the emergency circumstances of the clinical  context. Data on direct current cardioversion of AF in hemodynamically  stable patients demonstrate high success rate of restoring sinus rhythm with  direct current cardioversion.1,11,15–18 Electrical cardioversion is rapid. Electrical  cardioversion alone is more effective than pharmacological cardioversion  alone.1,11,12 2. Goals of rhythm control are summarized in Section 8.1 (“Goals of  Therapy With Rhythm Control”). Real-world data support both electrical  cardioversion and pharmacological cardioversion as acceptable, safe, and  efficacious methods for acute rhythm control.6,13,14 Electrical cardioversion  is more effective than pharmacological cardioversion alone1,11 but involves  the trade-off of requiring sedation.19 In patients with hemodynamically  stable AF of recent onset, the RAFF2 (Electrical versus pharmacological  cardioversion for emergency department patients with acute atrial fibrillation)  study demonstrated high success of restoration of sinus rhythm with either  an upfront electrical cardioversion strategy or a stepwise strategy with initial  pharmacological cardioversion and then direct current cardioversion if the  pharmacological intervention did not restore sinus rhythm.2 In patients with  unsuccessful pharmacological cardioversion, instead of switching to another  antiarrhythmic drug (and with concerns for potentiation of adverse effects  such as QT prolongation or bradycardia), electrical cardioversion should  be pursued as next step for acute rhythm control. Therefore, in patients  with hemodynamically stable AF, electrical cardioversion is favored over  pharmacological cardioversion when the patient is able to tolerate sedation,  desires more immediate rhythm conversion, or has failed or not met candidacy  for pharmacological cardioversion. Monitoring and preparedness during and after  electrical cardioversion include monitoring for rare chronotropic, hemodynamic,  or thromboembolic complications, and the effects of anesthesia administered  during electrical cardioversion.6,13,14,20–22 3. Unsynchronized or inappropriately synchronized cardioversion can induce VF  if the shock energy is delivered during the vulnerable period, the inscription  of the T wave.3,23–25 Therefore, electrical cardioversion for AF should be  synchronized with the QRS complex. The synchronization feature needs to be  turned on or confirmed that it is on; in patients who require multiple shocks,  the synchronization feature must be manually activated and/or confirmed before  each shock attempt. Visual confirmation of synchronization to QRS is important  to detect inappropriate synchronization and ensure appropriate synchronization. 4. An earlier small, multicenter, prospective randomized study demonstrated higher  efficacy of initial electrical cardioversion with a biphasic waveform instead  et al. Page 78 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

of monophasic waveform.4 A more contemporary single-centered, randomized  study of 279 patients who were randomized to synchronized direct current  cardioversion with biphasic waveform with either upfront maximum-fixed  energy or strategy of low-escalating energy found higher first shock success  with maximum-fixed energy (75% compared with 34% for low-escalating energy  group).5 In the contemporary RAFF2 study of patients with hemodynamically  stable AF of recent onset, the upfront electrical cardioversion group with initial  biphasic 200 J shock (and up to 3 consecutive shocks allowed, with higher  energy permitted for subsequent shocks) had conversion to sinus rhythm in 176  of 192 (92%) patients in this upfront electrical cardioversion shock-only group.2 5. A previous study of patients with persistent AF (median AF duration, 5 months)  undergoing direct current cardioversion with escalation of energy found the  anterior-posterior orientation of the electrode vector more successful at restoring  sinus rhythm than an anterior-lateral vector,7 while a subsequent study of  patients with recently diagnosed AF (≥3 hours and <7 days) undergoing direct  current cardioversion using biphasic upfront 200 J showed similar success rates  with electrode vectors in either anterior-posterior or anterior-lateral orientation.2  Taken together, when energy output is optimized as biphasic and maximal output  and the AF is of recent onset, either vector orientation may be reasonable, but for  patients with longer duration of AF, the anterior-posterior orientation of electrode  vector may be favorable.2 Manual pressure augmentation26 or administration  of antiarrhythmic drugs as pretreatment (Section 8.2.3, “Pharmacological  Cardioversion”)6,8,9 may also facilitate electrical cardioversion. 6. Increased body weight has been associated with reduced success of electrical  cardioversion.27 In a small randomized clinical study, use of paddles, manual  pressure augmentation (using electrically silent objects as insulator), and further  escalation of electrical energy improved success of electrical cardioversion  of obese patients with AF,10 and the benefits of these maneuvers may  mechanistically relate to overcoming increased transthoracic impedance. Other  alternatives in refractory cases include the use of 2 defibrillators simultaneously,  effectively doubling the delivered energy. 8.2.3. Pharmacological Cardioversion Recommendations for Pharmacological Cardioversion Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 2a C-LD 1. For patients with AF, pharmacological cardioversion is reasonable as an alternative to  electrical cardioversion for those who are hemodynamically stable or in situations when electrical  cardioversion is preferred but cannot be performed.1 2a A 2. For patients with AF, ibutilide2,3 is reasonable for pharmacological cardioversion for patients  without depressed LV function (LVEF <40%). 2a A 3. For patients with AF, intravenous amiodarone is reasonable for pharmacological cardioversion,  although time to conversion is generally longer than with other agents (8–12 hours).4–8 et al. Page 79 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

COR LOE Recommendations 2a A 4. For patients with recurrent AF occurring outside the setting of a hospital, the “pill-in-the-pocket”  (PITP) approach with a single oral dose of tlecainide9–11 or propafenone,10–14 with a concomitant  atrioventricular nodal blocking agent,15 is reasonable for pharmacological cardioversion if previously  tested in a monitored setting.16–18 2b B-R 5. For patients with AF, use of intravenous procainamide may be considered for pharmacological  cardioversion when other intravenous agents are contraindicated or not preferred.19 Synopsis: Pharmacological cardioversion is indicated for patients with new-onset or  persistent AF that is hemodynamically stable, or in rare instances when electrical  cardioversion is desired but contraindicated. Ibutilide works rapidly for pharmacological  cardioversion of AF but is associated with QT interval prolongation and torsades de  pointes, particularly in patients with HFrEF.2,3,20,21 Data support intravenous amiodarone  for pharmacological cardioversion,4–8 although intravenous amiodarone requires a longer  time for AF conversion than ibutilide. Evidence from randomized studies support the  efficacy of flecainide9–11 and propafenone10–14 for pharmacological cardioversion, and  these drugs are reasonable for administration via the PITP approach for AF occurring  outside of the hospital.16–18 Intravenous procainamide is more effective than placebo for  pharmacological conversion of AF19 but is less effective than ibutilide.22,23 Dofetilide,24,25  oral amiodarone,26–28 and oral sotalol27,28 have been shown to be effective for conversion  of AF to sinus rhythm but require several days for efficacy and therefore are not practical  choices for acute pharmacological cardioversion. Data do not support intravenous sotalol for  pharmacological cardioversion of AF.29,30 Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. No studies compare the efficacy of electrical cardioversion with that of  pharmacological cardioversion in patients with AF who are hemodynamically  unstable. However, in a retrospective, propensity score-matched analysis of  374 hemodynamically stable patients with AF who presented to an emergency  department, the incidence of successful cardioversion was higher in the  direct current cardioversion group (78.2%) than in those who underwent  pharmacological conversion (59.2%) or those for whom a “wait-and-watch”  approach (37.9%) was used (P<0.001).1 Compared with the “wait-and-watch”  strategy, the ORs for conversion to sinus rhythm for direct current cardioversion  and pharmacological cardioversion were 6.00 (95% CI, 3.38–10.66) and 2.47  (1.45–4.20), respectively (P<0.001). Due to the potential greater efficacy  of direct current cardioversion compared with that of pharmacological  cardioversion, and due to the need for rapid successful conversion to sinus  rhythm, immediate electrical cardioversion is generally the favored option, yet  some patients may not be candidates (eg, cannot undergo anesthesia), for whom  pharmacological options are available.31 2. Randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled studies have established the  efficacy of ibutilide2,3 for conversion of AF to sinus rhythm, with AF conversion  rates of about 30% (compared with 2% in placebo groups).2,3 The efficacy  of ibutilide is greater for AFL (conversion rates, 38%-63%) than for AF.2,3  et al. Page 80 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Ibutilide terminates AF rapidly, with most patients converting to sinus rhythm  within 30 to 90 minutes (Table 22). Ibutilide is associated with a risk of QT  interval prolongation and torsades de pointes. The incidence of torsades de  pointes associated with ibutilide is higher in patients with reduced LVEF than in  those with normal LVEF,2,3 and the risk seems particularly high in patients with  severely depressed LVEF.20 HFrEF is an independent risk factor for ibutilideassociated torsades de pointes.3,21 Therefore, ibutilide is best avoided in patients  with LVEF ≤40%. Of note, studies have shown that a magnesium infusion  immediately before administration of ibutilide may mitigate the risk of torsades  de pointes and excessive QT prolongation.32,33 3. Multiple randomized studies have found intravenous amiodarone to be effective  for conversion of AF to sinus rhythm.4–7 A meta-analysis of randomized,  placebo-controlled studies reported relative risks of sinus rhythm associated with  intravenous amiodarone at 6 to 8 hours and at 24 hours of 1.23 (P=0.022) and  1.44 (P<0.001), respectively.8 However, pharmacological cardioversion of AF  with intravenous amiodarone requires 8 to 12 hours, compared with a much  shorter response time with ibutilide (Table 22). 4. Single oral doses of flecainide9–11 and propafenone10–14 are effective for  conversion of AF to sinus rhythm, with 3- to 4-hour conversion rates of 58%  to 68% for flecainide (compared with 18%-29% for placebo) and 45% to 57%  for propafenone (compared with 17%-29% for placebo) (Table 22). A beta  blocker or nondihydropyridine calcium channel blocker is generally administered  at least 30 minutes before a dose of flecainide or propafenone to prevent 1:1  atrioventricular conduction during AFL.15 The PITP strategy was studied in  268 patients with stable AF of recent onset who presented to the emergency  department.16 Patients received single-dose oral flecainide or propafenone, and  those who were successfully treated (n=210) were discharged with a plan for  the PITP approach. In the 15±5-month follow-up period, single-dose flecainide  or propafenone was successful in 94% of episodes. However, the incidence of  adverse effects is not insignificant (6%-17%).16–18 In view of this, and because  in most studies, most patients received the first dose in the hospital before taking  it as an outpatient, the PITP strategy should only be used for highly selected  patients and after it first has been observed to be safe and effective in an inpatient  setting.17,18,34 5. Intravenous procainamide was shown to be more effective than placebo for  conversion of AF to sinus rhythm (conversion rates at 1 hour, 69% versus  38%; P=0.012) in a randomized, double-blind study of 114 patients.19 However,  intravenous procainamide is less effective than ibutilide for conversion of AF to  sinus rhythm (conversion rates, 14% versus 76%; P=0.001).22 The efficacy of  procainamide for conversion of AF to sinus rhythm was similarly inferior to that  of ibutilide in an analysis of pooled data.23 In addition, intravenous procainamide  is associated with a relatively high incidence of clinically significant hypotension  (5%-12%)19,23 and can exacerbate HFrEF. et al. Page 81 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

8.3. Antiarrhythmic Drugs for Maintenance of Sinus Rhythm 8.3.1. Specific Drug Therapy for Long-Term Maintenance of Sinus Rhythm Recommendations for Specific Drug Therapy for Long-Term Maintenance of Sinus Rhythm Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 2a A* 1. For patients with AF and HFrEF (≤40%), therapy with dofetilide*1 or amiodaronet2 is  reasonable for long-term maintenance of sinus rhythm.B-NR† 2a A 2. For patients with AF and no previous MI, or known or suspected significant structural heart  disease, or ventricular scar or fibrosis, use of tlecainide3–5 or propafenone5–12 is reasonable for  long-term maintenance of sinus rhythm. 2a A 3. For patients with AF without recent decompensated HF or severe LV dysfunction, use of  dronedarone5,13–15 is reasonable for long-term maintenance of sinus rhythm. 2a A 4. For patients with AF without significant baseline QT interval prolongation or uncorrected  hypokalemia or hypomagnesemia, use of dofetilide1,5,16 5–7,10,17,18 is reasonable for long-term  maintenance of sinus rhythm, with proper dose selection based on kidney function and close  monitoring of the QT interval, serum potassium and magnesium concentrations, and kidney  function. 2a A 5. For patients with AF and normal LV function, use of low-dose amiodarone (100–200 mg/d)  is reasonable for long-term maintenance of sinus rhy thm2,5,17–22 but, in view of its adverse  effect profile,5,23,24 should be reserved for patients in whom other rhythm control strategies are  ineffective, not preferred, or contraindicated. 2b A 6. For patients with AF without significant baseline QT interval prolongation, hypokalemia,  hypomagnesemia, or bradycardia, use of sotalol5–7,10,17,18 may be considered for long-term  maintenance of sinus rhythm, with proper dose selection based on kidney function and close  monitoring of the QT interval, heart rate, serum potassium and magnesium concentrations, and  kidney function. 3:  Harm B-R 7. In patients with previous MI and/or significant structural heart disease, including HFrEF  (LVEF ≤40%), flecainide and propafenone25 should not be administered due to the risk of  worsening HF, potential proarrhythmia, and increased mortality.26,27 3:  Harm B-R 8. For patients with AF, dronedarone should not be administered for maintenance of sinus  rhythm to those with NYHA class III and IV HF or patients who have had an episode of  decompensated HF in the past 4 weeks, due to the risk of increased early mortality associated  with worsening HF.28 *A LOE applies to data on dofetilide. †B-NR LOE applies to data on amiodarone. Synopsis—Antiarrhythmic drugs are reasonable for long-term maintenance of sinus  rhythm for patients with AF who are not candidates for, or decline, catheter ablation  or who prefer antiarrhythmic therapy. Flecainide3–5 and propafenone5–11 are options for  maintenance of sinus rhythm in patients with no previous history of MI or significant  structural heart disease.26,27 Dronedarone is an option for maintenance of sinus rhythm in  patients without recent decompensated HF or severe LV dysfunction.5,13–15 Dofetilide1,5,16  and sota lol5–7,10,17,18 are effective for maintenance of sinus rhythm but are associated  with torsades de pointes and require QT interval monitoring. Sotalol is best avoided in  patients with HFrEF, because most patients are already taking a beta blocker, and the  addition of sotalol is unlikely to be well-tolerated. A Cochrane database meta-analysis of  randomized studies5 reported sotalol to be associated with an increase in all-cause mortality  (RR, 2.23 [95% CI, 1.03–4.81]). Low-dose amiodarone is more effective than sotalol and  Class IC agents for maintenance of sinus rhythm; but, in view of its adverse effects and  multiple drug interactions, is best reserved for patients for whom other antiarrhythmic  et al. Page 82 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

drugsare ineffective, not preferred, or contraindicated. However, amiodarone and dofetilide  are options for maintenance of sinus rhythm for patients with HFrEF, as they are effective,1,2  and most other drugs are contraindicated. Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. In subanalyses of randomized trials, dofetilide1 and amiodarone2 have been  shown to be effective for maintenance of sinus rhythm in patients with AF who  have HF. Most antiarrhythmic agents, except amiodarone and dofetilide, are  contraindicated in patients with HFrEF due to worsening of HF and/or increased  mortality. Sotalol is best avoided in most patients with HFrEF, because most  patients with HFrEFare already taking a beta blocker for mortality reduction, and  the addition of a second beta blocker (sotalol) is unlikely to be well-tolerated.  Therefore, although amiodarone is associated with a wide range of adverse  effects and many clinically important drug interactions, amiodarone is often  used as a first-line agent for maintenance of sinus rhythm in patients with AF  and HFrEF. Dofetilide is also an option for this indication. Patients undergoing  initiation or reloading of dofetilide29,30 should be admitted for at least 3 days  to a health care facility that can provide calculations of CrCl, continuous  electrocardiographic monitoring, and availability of cardiac resuscitation. 2. Randomized, controlled studies and a comprehensive Cochrane database  analysis have established the efficacy of flecainide3–5 and propafenone5–11 for  maintenance of sinus rhythm in patients with AF. In the Flec-SL (Short-term  versus long-term antiarrhythmic drug treatment after cardioversion of atrial  fibrillation) trial,4 flecainide prevented episodes of paroxysmal AF in 31%  of patients over 4 months compared with 9% in the placebo group (0.013).  Sustained-release propafenone 425, 325, and 225 mg twice daily extended the  median time to the occurrence of AF, AFL, or supraventricular tachycardia  (SVT) compared with placebo (>300, 291, and 112 days versus 41 days,  P<0.001, for all propafenone doses versus placebo).8 Patients with previous MI  or significant structural heart disease (scar or fibrosis) should not take flecainide  of propafenone,26,27 and individuals taking flecainide or propafenone should be  concomitantly taking an atrioventricular nodal blocking agent to reduce the risk  of 1:1 AFL.12 3. Randomized, controlled studies13–15 and a comprehensive Cochrane database  analysis5 have established the efficacy of dronedarone for maintenance of sinus  rhythm in patients with AF. The combined analysis (n=1237) of EURIDIS  (European Trial in Atrial Fibrillation or Flutter Patients Receiving Dronedarone  for the Maintenance of Sinus Rhythm) and ADONIS (American-AustralianAfrican Trial with Dronedarone in Atrial Fibrillation or Flutter Patients for the  Maintenance of Sinus Rhythm) reported longer median times to AF recurrence  in dronedarone groups versus placebo (EURIDIS: 96 versus 41 days; P=0.001;  ADONIS 158 versus 59 days; P=0.002).14 4. Randomized, controlled studies and a comprehensive Cochrane database  analysis5 have established the efficacy of dofetilide for maintenance of sinus  et al. Page 83 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

rhythm in patients with AF. In the SAFIRE-D (Symptomatic Atrial Fibrillation  Investigative Research on Dofetilide) study,1,16 the probability of remaining in  sinus rhythm at 1 year was higher in patients receiving dofetilide 500 μg twice  daily compared with placebo (0.58 versus 0.25; P<0.001). Patients undergoing  initiation or reloading of dofetilide29,30 should be admitted for at least 3 days  to a health care facility that can provide calculations of CrCl, continuous  electrocardiographic monitoring, and cardiac resuscitation. 5. Multiple randomized, controlled studies have established the efficacy of  amiodarone for maintenance of sinus rhythm in AF and have shown amiodarone  to be superior to other antiarrhythmic agents. In SAFE-T (Sotalol Amiodarone  Atrial Fibrillation Efficacy Trial), amiodarone was superior to sotalol and  placebo with respect to median time to recurrence of AF (487 versus 74  versus 6 days, respectively; P<0.001, for amiodarone versus placebo and  amiodarone versus sotalol).17 In CTAF (Canadian Trial of Atrial Fibrillation),  AF recurrence rates at 16 months were 35% in the amiodarone group and  63% in those randomized to combined propafenone or sotalol (P<0.001).19  However, the adverse effects profile of amiodarone is onerous. Amiodarone  is associated with a wide range of adverse effects, including pulmonary  fibrosis, hypo- or hyperthyroidism, elevated transaminases, and more rarely  hepatotoxicity, photosensitivity, changes in skin pigmentation, peripheral  neuropathy, sinus bradycardia, QT interval prolongation and torsades de  pointes, corneal microdeposits, and rarely optic neuropathy.24 In addition,  amiodarone is associated with many clinically relevant drug interactions.31  Therefore, amiodarone is best reserved for patients who do not respond to other  recommended antiarrhythmic agents or for whom other antiarrhythmic drugs are  contraindicated. 6. Randomized, controlled studies and a comprehensive Cochrane database  analysis5 have established the efficacy of sotalol6,7,10,17,18 for maintenance of  sinus rhythm in patients with AF. In SAFE-T, the median time to AF recurrence  was 74 days in the sotalol group, compared with 6 days for placebo (P<0.001).16  A Cochrane database meta-analysis of 5 randomized studies totaling 1882  patients with AF5 reported sotalol to be associated with an increase in all-cause  mortality (RR, 2.23 [95% CI, 1.03–4.81]). However, this study included patients  with advanced HF, and sotalol may still have a role in patients with preserved  heart function. Patients undergoing initiation or reloading of oral sotalol should  be admitted for at least 3 days to a health care facility that can provide  calculations of CrCl, continuous electrocardiographic monitoring, and cardiac  resuscitation. A recent FDA-approved intravenous sotalol formulation can be  used to evaluate the drug safety and tolerability within 6 hours and thus may  reduce cost and length of stay, although the data are limited to a small sample  size and very selected population.32 7. In the randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled CAST (Cardiac Arrhythmia  Suppression Trial),26,27 the Vaughan Williams class IC antiarrhythmic agents  flecainide and encainide were associated with an increased mortality rate  et al. Page 84 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

in patients with recent MI; most patients also had LVEF <50%.26 In the  continuation of the study (CAST-II), the class IC agent moricizine also increased  the mortality rate within the first 14 days of treatment.33 In CASH (Cardiac  Arrest Study Hamburg),34 propafenone was associated with worse outcomes and  increased mortality in a population of cardiac arrest survivors, most of whom had  structural heart disease. Thus, IC agents are best avoided in patients with AF who  have a previous MI or significant structural heart disease, including HFrEF, due  to the risk of worsening HF and increased mortality. 8. ANDROMEDA (Antiarrhythmic Trial with Dronedarone in Moderate to  Severe CHF Evaluating Morbidity Decrease)28 was a randomized, double-blind  placebo-controlled study that tested the hypothesis that dronedarone would  reduce the rate of hospitalization attributable to HF and possibly reduce mortality  by reducing the incidence of arrhythmic death. The study enrolled patients who  were hospitalized with new or worsening HF and who had at least 1 episode  of NYHA class III or IV HF (shortness of breath on minimal exertion or at  rest). More than 40% of the patients had NYHA class II HF at baseline. The  investigators reported that, contrary to the study’s hypothesis, the mortality  rate was higher in the dronedarone group compared with that in the placebo  group (8.1% versus 3.8%; HR, 2.13 [95% CI, 1.07–4.25]; P=0.03). The higher  mortality rate was principally associated with worsening HF. 8.3.2. Inpatient Initiation of Antiarrhythmic Agents Recommendations for Inpatient Initiation of Antiarrhythmic Agents Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 A 1. Patients with AF who are initiating, increasing the dose of, or reinitiating dofetilide therapy should  be admitted for a minimum of 3 days to a facility that can provide continuous electrocardiographic  monitoring, calculations of CrCl, and cardiac resuscitation, given the potential for proarrhythmia.1–7 2a B-R 2. In patients with AF, it is reasonable to initiate sotalol therapy in a facility that can provide  continuous electrocardiographic monitoring, calculations of CrCl, and cardiac resuscitation, given  the potential for proarrhythmia and bradycardia.4,8–10 2a B-NR 3. In patients with AF who are initiating PITP dosing of flecainide and propafenone with  concomitant atrioventricular nodal blocking drugs, it is reasonable to receive the first dose in  a facility that can provide continuous electrocardiographic monitoring, given the potential for  proarrhythmia.9–13 Synopsis: Pharmacological rhythm control is an alternative to catheter ablation in  appropriately selected patients. However, many antiarrhythmic agents have a paradoxic  risk of proarrhythmia and require close monitoring on initiation. Dofetilide and sotalol  confer a relatively high risk of torsades de pointes given they prolong the QT interval,  and this can occur early during initiation. As such, patients need to be admitted and  closely monitored when starting or reinitiating dofetilide, as well as for increasing the  dosage. Many practitioners choose to initiate sotalol in an inpatient setting given it can  cause torsades de pointes; furthermore, unlike dofetilide, it can also cause bradyarrhythmia.  Amiodarone, flecainide, and propafenone can be started in the outpatient setting. Because  et al. Page 85 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

PITP with class IC (with concomitant atrioventricular nodal blockers) can cause brady- or  tachyarrhythmias, the first attempt during an acute episode of AF may be performed in a  monitored environment if a high dose is used. Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. Dofetilide, a class III antiarrhythmic drug, is a selective IKr blocker that also  blocks late Na+ current (INaL) and poses a high risk for torsades de pointes.  The SAFIRE-D (Symptomatic Atrial Fibrillation Investigative Research on  Dofetilide) study investigated dofetilide in cardioverting and maintaining sinus  rhythm in 325 patients with AF or AFL who underwent a minimum 3-day  hospitalization.1 Of 241 patients randomized to dofetilide, 10 patients had QTc  prolongation within the first 3 days, with 2 episodes of torsades de pointes  degenerating to VF. In a substudy of the AFFIRM trial, 1 of 12 patients on  dofetilide experienced torsades de pointes.3 One retrospective cohort of 378  patients found no significant differences in the incidence of torsades de pointes  during inpatient initiation of dofetilide and sotalol (1.3% versus 1.2%).4 One  systematic review found a 1% to 10% incidence of torsades de pointes in  patients taking dofetilide, highest in patients with HFrEF and taking higher than  recommended (or not renally adjusted) doses.14 In 2 randomized RCTs from  the DIAMOND (Management of Hyperkalemia in Subjects Receiving Reninangiotensin-aldosterone System Inhibitor Medications for Heart Failure with  Reduced Ejection Fraction) population, in which all patients were hospitalized  for at least 3 days after dofetilide was initiated, torsades de pointes occurred in  25 of 762 patients (3.3%)5 and 7 of 749 patients (0.9%),7 respectively, with most  occurring within the first 3 days of dosing. In the DIAMOND AF substudy of  these trials,6 torsades de pointes occurred in 4 dofetilide-treated patients with AF  (1.6%). 2. Sotalol is a class III antiarrhythmic with beta-blocking properties. Its action  potential prolongation (due to the IKr-blocking properties of the d isomer in  concert with INaL blockade) predisposes patients to torsades de pointes. One  meta-analysis demonstrated that sotalol, compared with placebo or no treatment,  was associated with a significantly higher all-cause mortality rate (RR, 2.23;  1882 patients in 5 RCTs) and proarrhythmia (RR, 3.55; 2989 patients in 12  RCTs).18 The SAFE-T trial randomized 665 patients to amiodarone, sotalol, or  placebo, all initiated in the outpatient setting (sotalol at 80 mg twice daily for  the first week and 160 mg twice daily subsequently).15 Fifteen deaths occurred  in the sotalol group, 8 of which were sudden, with a nonsignificant mortality  ratio of 1.8 compared with placebo. In 1 retrospective cohort of 120 patients  undergoing sotalol initiation as an inpatient, 2 of 7 had torsades de pointes; 20  patients developed significant bradyarrhythmias necessitating dose reductions,  and 3 patients required permanent pacing.8 Intravenous sotalol was introduced in  the United States in 2015 and reaches therapeutic levels rapidly and with easier  dose titration to QTc levels and clinical response. As such, it may be an option  et al. Page 86 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

for more expedient inpatient initiation (obviating the need for a 3-day initiation  period).16 3. The PITP strategy—a high dose of a class IC agent (flecainide 200–300 mg  or propafenone 450–600 mg, with an atrioventricular nodal blocker)—can be  considered for patients who experience infrequent episodes of symptomatic  AF and do not prefer chronic antiarrhythmic therapy. Class IC agents are  generally administered with concomitantly atrioventricular nodal blocking agents  to mitigate risk of rapidly conducting AFL. Because of the risk of adverse  effects and proarrhythmia with high-dose IC agents, inpatient initiation of  PITP has been studied. In 1 trial evaluating the safety of outpatient PITP  therapy after initiation as an inpatient, 58 of 268 (22%) patients experienced  transient hypotension, 1:1 and 2:1 AFL, and symptomatic bradycardia.9 In a  prospective study of 43 patients who presented to the emergency department  for initiation of PITP,10 sinus rhythm was restored in 30 patients; 13 patients  remained in AF, and/or had symptomatic hypotension, converted to rapid AFL  requiring cardioversion, or experienced a syncopal conversion pause. In a  retrospective cohort13 study of 273 patients initiating PITP (62% inpatient), 7  patients experienced significant adverse events, including syncope, symptomatic  bradycardia/hypotension, and organization to 1:1 AFL—2 of 7 of these patients  initiated PITP as an inpatient, and 2 patients required permanent pacemakers for  bradycardia. 8.3.3. Antiarrhythmic Drug Follow-Up— Antiarrhythmic drugs are associated with  important adverse effects, and monitoring is recommended to assess their efficacy for  maintaining sinus rhythm and for prevention and/or early detection of adverse events. Amiodarone: Recommendations for follow-up monitoring for patients taking oral  amiodarone are provided in Table 24. Amiodarone contains 37% iodine by weight and  is therefore associated with thyroid abnormalities in 2% to 24% of patients.1 In 1 study, the  median time to onset of amiodarone-induced hypothyroidism was 183 days, with a median  onset of hyperthyroidism of 720 days.2 Oral amiodarone may also provoke elevations in  hepatic transaminases and, rarely, hepatotoxicity.3 Amiodarone may cause pulmonary toxicity, most commonly in the form of interstitial lung  disease or hypersensitivity syndrome,4 in 1% to 2% of patients and is fatal in approximately  10% of cases. Consequently, a chest x-ray is recommended at baseline and when there is a  clinical suspicion for pulmonary toxicity.4,5 Pulmonary function testing, including diffusing  capacity for carbon monoxide, can reveal relatively early changes in pulmonary function that  may be attributable to amiodarone-associated pulmonary toxicity; however, the sensitivity of  the test for routine screening of drug-induced lung toxicity in general is uncertain.4–7 In patients who develop unexplained cough and dyspnea while taking amiodarone, a chest  CT scan can be helpful for diagnosis.5 Corneal microdeposits (epithelial keratopathy) are common, but visual abnormalities and  light sensitivity are rare.8 Therefore, an ophthalmologic examination is reasonable only  et al. Page 87 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

if visual abnormalities develop. Amiodarone has also been associated with neurological  toxicity, particularly peripheral neuropathy. Although less common than class III antiarrhythmic agents, oral amiodarone may cause  torsades de pointes9; 1 analysis estimated the incidence to be 0.7%.10 Other Antiarrhythmic Drugs: Recommendations for follow-up of other antiarrhythmic  agents used for management of AF are provided in Table 25. Dofetilide: Dofetilide is a potent inhibitor of IKr, augments INa-L, and is associated with  torsades de pointes.9 The incidence of torsades de pointes associated with dofetilide ranges  from 0.9% to 3.3%.11,12 However, the incidence can be substantially higher if the dofetilide  dose is not properly adjusted for kidney function. Patients undergoing initiation or reloading  of dofetilide are generally admitted for at least 3 days to a health care facility that  can provide calculations of CrCl, continuous electrocardiographic monitoring, and cardiac  resuscitation. After discharge on a stable dose of these drugs, a 12-lead ECG, and levels  for serum magnesium, potassium, and creatinine are recommended every 3 to 6 months  for assessment of QTc interval duration, electrolyte balance, and renal function, and more  frequently for patients concomitantly taking other QT interval-prolonging drugs or with  changing kidney function, to minimize the risk of drug-associated torsades de pointes. Dronedarone: Rare cases of severe liver injury have been reported in association with  dronedarone. These cases have occurred 4.5 to 6 months after initiation of dronedarone  therapy, although 1 case of hepatotoxicity was reported as early as 2 days after initiation  of dronedarone (and was ultimately fatal a few days later),13 although a severe case of  dronedarone-associated toxic hepatitis occurred 9 months after initiation of therapy.14 Ibutilide: Ibutilide may prolong the QT interval and cause torsades de pointes15–22 and  therefore continuous electrocardiographic monitoring is recommended during infusion and  for 4 hours after completion of ibutilide infusion. Ibutilide is associated with nonsustained  ventricular tachycardia (VT), QT interval prolongation, and torsades de pointes. The  incidence of nonsustained VT has been reported to be as high as 8.3%.23 Torsades de pointes  occurs in approximately 2% to 7% of patients,15–22 but the incidence increases substantially  in patients with depressed LVEF.22 Most reported cases of ibutilide-associated nonsustained  VT and torsades de pointes have occurred within 30 minutes after the last dose; torsades  de pointes has rarely been reported as late as 2.5 hours after an ibutilide infusion.22 QTc  intervals generally return to baseline within 2 to 3 hours after a dose. The risk of drug-induced torsades de pointes is higher in patients with hypokalemia and/or  hypomagnesemia. Hypokalemia has been reported to be present in 17% to 70% of patients  who have developed drug-induced torsades de pointes.24–27 Similarly, hypomagnesemia has  been reported to be a contributing factor to numerous published cases of drug-induced  torsades de pointes.27–29 Therefore, maintenance of serum potassium and magnesium  concentrations within the normal range is important before administration of ibutilide, and  magnesium supplementation may mitigate the risk of torsades de pointes. et al. Page 88 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Procainamide: Intravenous procainamide is associated with hypotension in 5% to 12%  of patients when used for management of AF,30,31 and BP monitoring is recommended.  Intravenous procainamide is also associated with widening of the QRS complex and  prolongation of the QT interval and may provoke proarrhythmia in the form of  monomorphic VT32 and torsades de pointes.33 Sotalol: Sotalol is a potent inhibitor of IKr, augments INa-L, and is associated with torsades  de pointes, with an incidence ranging from 0.4% to 2.3%.34,35 Patients undergoing initiation  or dose escalation of sotalol are often admitted for at least 3 days to a health care facility that  can provide calculations of CrCl, continuous electrocardiographic monitoring, and cardiac  resuscitation. A new intravenous form of sotalol was recently FDA approved, which may  obviate the need for 3-day admission. After discharge on a stable dose of these drugs, a  12-lead ECG, and levels of serum magnesium, potassium, and creatinine are recommended  every 3 to 6 months for assessment of QTc interval duration, electrolyte balance, and  renal function, and more frequently for patients concomitantly taking other QT intervalprolonging drugs or with changing kidney function, to minimize the risk of drug-associated  torsades de pointes. 8.3.4. Upstream Therapy— Pharmacological treatments targeting upstream pathways  have included glucocorticoids, ACE inhibitors, ARBs, aldosterone antagonists, statins,  omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids, antioxidants, and sodium-glucose cotransporter 2  inhibitors (see Section 5, “Lifestyle and Risk Factor Modification for AF Management”).  Targeting inflammation, a randomized study of glucocorticoids reduced recurrent AF after  first occurrence of persistent AF, but adverse effects inhibit long-term steroid use.1–9  Statins reduced postoperative AF in small RCTs.10–14 However, an adequately powered  placebo-controlled trial of rosuvastatin did not reduce postoperative AF.15 Statins do not  prevent AF in other cardiovascular settings.16 RCTs and a meta-analysis provide limited  though consistent support for the antioxidant ascorbic acid for postoperative AF.17 Targeting  fibrosis, small or secondary studies of RCTs reported lower new AF with ACE inhibitors  or ARBs.2–9 However, larger RCTs targeting AF failed to reduce recurrent AF.18–20 RCTs  showed that MRAs reduced new-onset atrial arrhythmias in patients with HFrEF along with  improvement of other cardiovascular outcomes.21,22 In patients with type 2 diabetes, HF, or  CKD, sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors appear to prevent new AF.23–25 In contrast,  omega-3 fatty acids do not appear to reduce AF and, in 1 large study, was associated with  higher occurrence of AF.26–31 With only limited or inconsistent data, no recommendations  are made for use of these upstream therapies for prevention of AF. et al. Page 89 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

8.4. AF Catheter Ablation Recommendations for AF Catheter Ablation Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 A 1. In patients with symptomatic AF in whom antiarrhythmic drugs have been ineffective,  contraindicated, not tolerated or not preferred, and continued rhythm control is desired,  catheter ablation is useful to improve symptoms.1–10 1 A 2. In selected patients (generally younger with few comorbidities) with symptomatic  paroxysmal AF in whom rhythm control is desired, catheter ablation is useful as firstline therapy to improve symptoms and reduce progression to persistent AF.11–16 1 A 3. In patients with symptomatic or clinically significant AFL, catheter ablation is useful  for improving symptoms.17–19 2a B-NR 4. In patients who are undergoing ablation for AF, ablation of additional clinically  significant supraventricular arrhythmias can be useful to reduce the likelihood of future  arrhythmia.17,18,20–27 2a B-R 5. In patients (other than younger with few comorbidities) with symptomatic paroxysmal  or persistent AF who are being managed with a rhythm-control strategy, catheter  ablation as first-line therapy can be useful to improve symptoms.11–13,28 Cost Value  Statement:  Intermediate B-R 6. Catheter ablation for symptomatic AF provides intermediate economic value  compared with antiarrhythmic drug therapy.29,30 2b B-NR 7 In selected* patients with asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic AF, catheter  ablation may be useful for reducing progression of AF and its associated  complications.31–39 *Younger patients with few comorbidities and a moderate to high burden of AF or persistent AF and AFL. Synopsis—Catheter ablation has become an established therapy for AF because of  multiple RCTs and evidence from large registries and continues to evolve as new  technologies are developed. Previous professional society documents have provided  different recommendations for catheter ablation dependent on whether AF was persistent  or paroxysmal.25,40 More recent information has shown that ablation for AF is more  effective than antiarrhythmic drugs for both persistent and paroxysmal AF and that earlier  implementation of rhythm control strategies is an important factor for improving AF  ablation success rat es.4,35,41–44 As with all strategies for rhythm control of AF, impact on  a patient’s goals of care and QOL should be the focus. For example, significantly reducing  the frequency and duration of AF episodes but not eliminating all future episodes of AF may  represent a clinically important improvement. Although RCTs have mainly used younger  patients (<70 years of age) who also experience the largest benefits, observational studies  have reported improvement in QOL with catheter ablation in older patients.3–6,8,45–47 Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. In patients who have not responded to an antiarrhythmic drug due to a  high burden of recurrent AF or adverse effects from the medication, RCTs  have consistently demonstrated lower risk for recurrent symptomatic AF after  ablation when compared with using another antiarrhythmic medication.1–10 As  an example, in STOP-AF, patients who had failed ≥1 antiarrhythmic drug  (approximately 70% and 30% for 1 or 2 failed drugs, respectively) were  et al. Page 90 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

randomized to either another antiarrhythmic drug or catheter ablation. At 1  year follow-up, catheter ablation was associated with a treatment success rate  of 70% compared with 7% in the drug arm.10 Similarly, in the Thermo-cool  (NA VISTAR THERMOCOOL Catheter for the Radiofrequency Ablation of  Symptomatic Paroxysmal Atrial Fibrillation) trial, patients with paroxysmal  AF who had failed 1 antiarrhythmic medication were randomized to catheter  ablation or another antiarrhythmic drug. After 9 months, 66% of patients in  the catheter ablation group were free from recurrent arrhythmia compared with  16% in the antiarrhythmic drug group.8 Finally, most recently, in the CABANA  trial, 80% of patients were on an antiarrhythmic medication and thought to  be candidates for AF ablation and were randomized to catheter ablation or  continued antiarrhythmic therapy. Catheter ablation was associated with a nearly  50% reduction in recurrent AF (HR, 0.52 [95% CI, 0.45–0.60]; P<0.001).4,28 2. In selected patients with paroxysmal AF, ablation is a suitable first-line option.  Several initial RCTs suggested a decrease in recurrent AF or AF burden with  catheter ablation when compared with antiarrhythmic drugs.16 More recent  trials have shown a significant reduction in recurrent AF with catheter ablation  compared with antiarrhythmic drugs. In a follow-up report of 1 study, after  3-year follow-up, catheter ablation continued to be associated with a significant  decrease in recurrent atrial tachyarrhythmias when compared with antiarrhythmic  drugs (HR, 0.51 [95% CI, 0.38–0.67]).14 More importantly, episodes of  persistent AF developed in only 1.9% of patients randomized to catheter ablation  compared with 7.4% of patients in the antiarrhythmic drug arm (HR, 0.25 [95%  CI, 0.13–0.70]).14 All of the studies that have evaluated catheter ablation as an  initial strategy for rhythm control in patients with paroxysmal AF, although fairly  standard exclusion criteria were used, enrolled relatively young patients (average  age approximately 60 years) who had relatively few comorbidities (if present,  mainly hypertension).16 3. AFL is most commonly due to the critical isthmus formed by the inferior vena  cava and the tricuspid valve. More rarely, in patients who have not undergone  previous ablation procedures atypical AFL or focal ATs can be observed.  Catheter ablation of typical AFL is effective and relatively low risk.17–19 In  an older meta-analysis of AFL ablation studies, AFL ablation was associated  with an acute success rate of 90% and a complication rate of 2.6%.18 The  occurrence of AF after AFL ablation was 34%, with a recurrence rate of 23%  in those patients without a history of AF compared with 53% in patients with a  history of AF. By 5 years, AF developed in 60% to 70% of patients regardless of  whether the patient had a history of AF before the AFL ablation. Little evidence  is available in these studies for the clinical significance of AF after AFL ablation. 4. AF can be associated with other atrial arrhythmias, particularly AFL.20–22  During ablation for AF, ablation of previously documented or inducible sustained  SVT or AFL is useful to reduce the likelihood of recurrent arrhythmias.22–25  Although ablation alone for AF in patients with both AF and AFL will reduce  the likelihood of AFL, and ablation targeting an inducible SVT in a patient  et al. Page 91 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

with AF may reduce future AF, in both cases the likelihood of recurrent  arrhythmias is high, although the actual recurrence rate will depend on the  specific population.17,18,25–27,48,49 Conversely, prophylactic catheter ablation of  the CTI in patients without documented or inducible AFL likely has minimal  benefit.50 Alternatively, in 1 study, cryoballoon PVI as first-line treatment for  AFL is equally effective compared with standard CTI ablation for preventing  recurrence of atrial arrhythmia and better at preventing new-onset AF.51 5. Several randomized trials have compared catheter ablation to AADs as first-line  therapy for AF.11–13 In the MANTRA-AF study, ablation and antiarrhythmic  drugs as first-line therapy for paroxysmal AF was evaluated. Although no  differences in AF were identified during the first 18 months, at 24-month  follow-up, ablation was associated with a lower AF burden (ablation, 9% versus  antiarrhythmic drugs, 18%; P=0.004).11 Subsequent studies have demonstrated  similar results: In the EARLY-AF (Early Aggressive Invasive Intervention for  Atrial Fibrillation) study, at 1-year follow-up, recurrent atrial arrhythmias were  identified in 43% of the ablation group and 68% of the antiarrhythmic drug  group (P<0.001), and in the STOP AF First (Cryoballoon Catheter Ablation in  an Antiarrhythmic Drug Naive Paroxysmal Atrial Fibrillation) study, recurrent  atrial arrhythmias were identified in 25% of the ablation group and 55% of  the antiarrhythmic drug group (P<0.001).12,13 Procedural complications were  observed in 2% to 5% of patients in all 3 studies.11–13 Although AF burden  was significantly reduced with ablation compared with antiarrhythmic drug  therapy in EARLY-AF, AF burden was low with either strategy (percentage  of time in AF: ablation, 0.6% versus antiarrhythmic drugs, 3.9%) and, in all  3 trials, the average age was ≤60 years.11–13 Although these trials enrolled  patients with paroxysmal AF, recent studies have consistently found that catheter  ablation is more commonly used and also effective in patients with persistent AF,  particularly if of relatively recent onset (<1 year).28 6. Catheter ablation for AF is a costly procedure yet appears to provide value  by improving the symptoms of AF and patient QOL. Some of the initially  higher costs of the ablation procedure may be offset by reductions in subsequent  cardiovascular hospitalizations. Formal economic analyses have been performed  alongside 2 randomized controlled clinical trials. Both trials showed higher costs  and improved QOL during follow-up, with incremental cost-effectiveness ratios  of $58 000 and €51 000 per quality adjusted life-year added, values within the  intermediate value range (between $50 000 and $150 000 per quality29,30,52–55  adjusted life-year added) by ACC/AHA criteria. Models of the cost-effectiveness  of catheter ablation have reported more favorable results, but their results  generally depended on assumptions that ablation reduced mortality, or ischemic  stroke, or both, which have not been proven. 7. In most patients, continued untreated AF will lead to progression and higher  AF burden associated with worse clinical outcomes.31–39 In patients with  subclinical AF <24 hours, progression to overt AF or episodes >24 hours  occurs at a rate of 8.8% per year, and those patients who develop AF are  et al. Page 92 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

more likely to be hospitalized for HF.56 Several observational studies have  reported AF progression may be improved by using a catheter-based ablation  rhythm-control strategy.33–35,37,38 As an example, in 1 randomized trial that  was stopped prematurely, in 255 patients with paroxysmal AF randomized  to catheter ablation or antiarrhythmic medication, freedom from persistent  AF or AT was significantly higher with catheter ablation (ablation: 2.4%,  versus antiarrhythmic medication, 17.5%, 1-sided P=0.0009).57 However, serious  adverse events associated with the ablation were observed in 8% of patients.57  Despite the potential risks associated with catheter ablation, in a recent analysis  of a large registry that specifically evaluated asymptomatic patients, rhythm  control was associated with an improvement in the composite outcome of cardiac  death, ischemic stroke, and hospitalization for HF.58 The impact was largest in  those patients who underwent catheter ablation for rhythm control, particularly  in those with paroxysmal AF, LA diameters ≤50 mm,58 or higher stroke risk  (CHA2DS2-V ASc score ≥3). In a post hoc analysis of EAST-AFNET 4, the  magnitude of benefit from a rhythm-control strategy for reducing the primary  composite outcome of cardiovascular death, stroke, or hospitalizations for HF  or ACS was independent of symptom status, and catheter ablation for rhythm  control was used in approximately 20% of patients, whether symptomatic or  not.59 8.4.1. Patient Selection— Patient selection is the first step and a critically important  step in deciding candidacy for catheter ablation.1–4 Younger patients are likely to derive  greater long-term benefit, including delaying AF progression. However, clinical trials have  demonstrated improved cardiovascular outcomes with rhythm control, even with median  ages in the 70s.5 Patients with minimal atrial enlargement have the best outcomes,6 whereas  increased myocardial fibrosis7,8 and more persistent forms of AF are associated with higher  rates of recurrence after ablation. Time from diagnosis to ablation is also associated with  improved outcomes after ablation.9,10 Although the likelihood of recurrence of AF is 1  factor that should be considered, it is difficult to predict,11 and certain patients may derive  even greater benefits from catheter ablation, such as in patients with HFrEF, who have been  shown to have improved functional status, LV function, and cardiovascular outcomes.12–14 In some patients, ablation should be avoided as it is unlikely to be successful due to  overwhelming substrate or ongoing physiologic processes that either strongly perpetuate the  risk of AF or make maintenance of sinus rhythm unlikely. These situations include but are  not limited to advanced infiltrative cardiomyopathies like amyloid, severe mitral stenosis or  regurgitation, and cor pulmonale. et al. Page 93 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

8.4.2. Techniques and Technologies for AF Catheter Ablation Recommendations for Techniques and Technologies for AF Catheter Ablation Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 A 1. In patients undergoing ablation for AF, PVI is recommended as the primary lesion set for all  patients unless a different specific trigger is identified.1–7 2b B-R 2. In patients undergoing ablation for AF, the value of other endpoints beyond PVI such as  noninducibility and ablation of additional anatomic ablation targets (eg, posterior wall sites, low  voltage areas, complex fractionated electrograms, rotors) is uncertain.8–18 Synopsis: Catheter ablation is now established as an effective option for rhythm control in  patients with AF and AFL.1–7,16 However, in patients with AF, additional ablation targets  beyond isolation of PVI as a routine strategy have not reduced AF recurrence or burden  in RCTs.8–18 Although achieving durable pulmonary vein ablation in patients with AF has  been associated with less recurrent arrhythmias, other endpoints, such as termination of  F and noninducibility, have not been associated with improved outcomes.19–28 Significant  complications of AF ablation include stroke and TIAs, pericardial effusion, and vascular  complications.16 The most serious complication that occurs after the ablation procedure  is development of an esophageal atrial fistula, although other complications, such as PV  stenosis can occur.8–18 Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. Multiple randomized studies have shown that PVI is more effective than medical  therapy for reducing AF burden.1–7 A recent meta-analysis of 6 RCTs found  that strategies that included PVI were associated with a 50% reduction in the  development of recurrent AF when compared with strategies that did not include  PVI.7 2. Studies have evaluated the use of different endpoints immediately after catheter  ablation for predicting durable PVI and the likelihood of future arrhythmias  with mixed results.19–28 In the largest randomized study to date, techniques  such as waiting for 30 minutes, using adenosine triphosphate to facilitate  PV reconnection, or the combination of waiting and using adenosine were  not superior to no testing for predicting durable pulmonary vein isolation or  reduction in future arrhythmias. Although noninducibility remains important  in determining whether ablation for paroxysmal SVT has been successful,  noninducibility after AF ablation or termination of AF with ablation have had  mixed results for predicting the likelihood of future recurrence.19–29 3. Multiple ablation targets beyond PVI have been evaluated in randomized  controlled and observational trials, including the LAA, posterior wall, the  ligament of Marshall, or atrial scar.8–18 Results have been mixed, and no  strategy has emerged that is broadly applicable in all patients, likely because  the individual mechanisms for AF vary from patient to patient.8–18 Targeting  large areas of atrial tissue may have potential negative consequences, including  et al. Page 94 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

a higher likelihood of complications such as atrioesophageal fistula, poor LA  mechanics, atypical flutters, and increased risk for stroke.30–35 8.4.3. Management of Recurrent AF After Catheter Ablation Recommendations for Management of Recurrent AF After Catheter Ablation Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 B-NR 1. In patients with recurrent symptomatic AF after catheter ablation, repeat catheter ablation or  antiarrhythmic drug therapy is useful to improve symptoms and freedom from AF.1–11 2a A 2. In some patients who have undergone catheter ablation of AF, short-term antiarrhythmic  drug therapy after ablation can be useful to reduce early recurrences of atrial arrhythmia and  hospitalization.12–16 Synopsis: Recurrences of AF are common after a first ablation procedure, occurring in  30% to 40% of patients in contemporary clinical trials.1,2 In general US practice, 11%  of patients undergoing de novo ablation have a repeat ablation by 1 year.3 Patients often  experience improved symptoms and QOL even when they experience recurrence after  catheter ablation.4 Nonetheless, recurrent atrial arrhythmia that leads to symptoms or LV  dysfunction requires treatment. Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. In general, successful suppression of AF improves with additional or multiple  ablation procedures.5–7 The absolute limit to the number of ablations a patient  can undergo is unknown. For example, it is possible that a patient with previous  PVI and repeat ablations with substrate modification may benefit from ablation  of PV to LA reconnections, or ablation of additional triggers. However, repeat  ablations carry increased risks of adverse effects. These risks are rare but include  PV stenosis and stiff LA syndrome.8,9,17 Many of the randomized clinical trials, which have demonstrated superiority of catheter  ablation over antiarrhythmic drug therapy, included repeat ablation procedures as part of  their prospective study designs.1,10,11,18 Randomized data also suggest that repeat ablation  is superior to antiarrhythmic drug therapy for the treatment of recurrent AF after first  ablation.19 Although no large direct head-to-head trials are available of repeat catheter  ablation versus no repeat catheter ablation, the aggregate data from randomized trials  suggest that repeat ablation improves arrhythmia suppression and symptom control. Limited  numbers of randomized trials can guide the optimal approach to repeat catheter ablation  (beyond reisolation of the PVs).12,13 Although randomized data suggest that repeat ablation is superior to antiarrhythmic drug  therapy for the treatment of recurrent AF after first ablation,19 recurrences of AF after  catheter ablation can also be successfully treated with antiarrhythmic drug therapy even  when these same medications may have been ineffective before ablation.3,14 Antiarrhythmic  drugs have also been associated with decreased recurrent atrial arrhythmias in those who  have undergone previous ablation.14 Other studies have shown that use of previously  et al. Page 95 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

ineffective antiarrhythmic therapy can be effective after ablation.15 Optimal rhythm control  often requires a combined approach of catheter ablation and adjunctive antiarrhythmic drug  therapy, especially in patients with long-standing persistent AF or patients with advanced  atrial myopathies. 1. Several clinical trials have demonstrated the efficacy and safety of short-term  (3–6 months postablation) antiarrhythmic therapy to prevent recurrences of AF,  symptoms, cardioversion, and hospitalization after ablation.16,20,21 Moreover,  continued use of antiarrhythmic drugs beyond the blanking period (3 months)  may reduce the risk of recurrent atrial arrhythmias out to 1 year.15 Meta-analysis  of randomized trials evaluating the use of short-term antiarrhythmic drug therapy  have determined that it significantly decreases the risk of early, but not late,  recurrence.22,23 Observational data from nationwide practice data also suggest  that antiarrhythmic therapy after ablation can reduce hospital readmissions by  37% in the short term (90 days) after ablation.24 Although the evidence base for  short-term antiarrhythmic drug therapy after ablation is robust, the decision to  use short-term antiarrhythmic drug therapy should be based on the patient’s risk  and informed by SDM. 8.4.4. Anticoagulation Therapy Before and After Catheter Ablation Recommendations for Anticoagulation Therapy Before and After Catheter Ablation Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 B-NR 1. In patients on warfarin who are undergoing catheter ablation of AF, catheter ablation should be  performed on uninterrupted therapeutic anticoagulation with a goal INR of 2.0 to 3.0.1 1 A 2. In patients on a DOAC who are undergoing catheter ablation of AF, catheter ablation should be  performed with either continuous or minimally interrupted oral anticoagulation.2–10 1 B-NR 3. In patients who have undergone catheter ablation of AF, oral anticoagulation should be continued  for at least 3 months after the procedure with a longer duration determined by underlying risk.11 1 B-NR 4. In patients who have undergone catheter ablation of AF, continuation of longer-term oral  anticoagulation should be dictated according to the patients’ stroke risk (eg, CHA2DS2-V ASc score  ≥2).11–17 Synopsis: Catheter ablation has been demonstrated in randomized clinical trials to reduce  arrhythmia burden improve QOL and, in select populations, it has been shown to improve  cardiovascular outcomes. Complications after catheter ablation are infrequent, yet the risk  of thromboembolic events is increased after ablation. The risk of stroke in the first 30 days  after ablation is 0.8%.18 Thus, oral anticoagulation before, during, and after catheter ablation  procedures is paramount. Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. All patients undergoing catheter ablation require intraprocedural intravenous  anticoagulation with heparin or direct thrombin inhibitors in those with heparin  allergies. Management of oral anticoagulation during these procedures is also  critically important. In those patients undergoing catheter ablation of AF who  et al. Page 96 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

are taking warfarin for their oral anticoagulation, evidence from observational  studies and randomized trial data suggest that optimal efficacy and safety  is achieved with uninterrupted warfarin. Patients undergoing catheter ablation  of AF who have subtherapeutic INRs or interrupted warfarin have more  evidence of silent cerebral ischemic events on brain magnetic resonance  imaging after the procedure.1 In the COMPARE (Role of Coumadin in  Preventing Thromboembolism in Atrial Fibrillation [AF] Patients Undergoing  Catheter Ablation) trial, interruption of warfarin was highly associated with  periprocedural thromboembolic events (OR, 13 [95% CI, 3.1–55.6]; P<0.001).1  Patients treated with uninterrupted warfarin had lower rates of thromboembolic  events (5% versus 0.25%; P<0.001) and lower rates of periprocedural bleeding  compared with those in whom warfarin was stopped or interrupted. 2. Although uninterrupted warfarin is superior to interrupted warfarin among  persons undergoing catheter ablation of AF, meta-analyses have demonstrated  lower risks of major bleeding with uninterrupted direct oral anticoagulation  compared with uninterrupted vitamin K antagonism.2 Many randomized  trials have been completed that compare uninterrupted DOACs versus  uninterrupted VKAs, including trials of apixaban,3,4 dabigatran,5 edoxaban,6  and rivaroxaban.7 In aggregate, these trials have demonstrated the noninferiority  of uninterrupted direct-acting oral anticoagulation compared with uninterrupted  vitamin K antagonism. Several randomized trials also compare minimally  interrupted direct-acting oral anticoagulation versus uninterrupted direct-acting  oral anticoagulation8 or uninterrupted vitamin K antagonism.9 These clinical  trials and meta-analyses suggest that outcomes with minimally interrupted  direct-acting oral anticoagulation are not different compared with continuous  anticoagulation.10 3. The risk of thromboembolic and stroke events increases after ablation due to  vascular and cardiac instrumentation, release of tissue factor, and myocardial  injury. Most randomized clinical trials of catheter ablation that demonstrate a low  risk of periprocedural stroke mandated oral anticoagulation for a minimum of 2  months after ablation to reduce the risk of stroke, regardless of CHA2DS2-V ASc  score.19 4. Greater burden or time in AF is associated with higher rates of stroke.12–14  Accordingly, reducing exposure to AF via catheter ablation might be expected to  reduce the risk of stroke. Although some observational studies have identified  lower stroke risk after catheter ablation,15,16 randomized clinical trials of  catheter ablation have not demonstrated reductions in stroke.11,17 Observational  data regarding the risk of stroke after catheter ablation of AF are mixed and vary  across study design and methods. For example, in an analysis of 4 050 patients  undergoing catheter ablation with a CHA2DS2-V ASc score ≥2 in Denmark,  the risk after ablation was low and comparable in those who did (0.93/100  patient years) and did not (0.97/100 patient years) discontinue anticoagulation  >3 months after ablation.20 In contrast, a study of 6 866 patients who underwent  catheter ablation of AF in US clinical practice found that the risk of stroke  et al. Page 97 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

was increased in patients with a CHA2DS2-V ASc score ≥2 who discontinued  oral anticoagulation after 3 months (HR, 2.48 [95% CI, 1.11–5.52]; P<0.05).21  In this same study, no increased risk was observed that was associated with  discontinuation after 3 months in those with a CHA2DS2-V ASc score of 0 to 1.  Ongoing randomized trials are investigating whether oral anticoagulation can be  safely discontinued in patients who have no significant arrhythmia recurrences  after catheter ablation. Finally, the OPTION (Comparison of Anticoagulation  With Left Atrial Appendage Closure After AF Ablation) trial (NCT03795298)  will test whether LAAO is noninferior to continued oral anticoagulation after  catheter ablation of AF.22 Given (1) the absence of randomized data that directly  address this question, (2) the absence of consistent data demonstrating a lower  risk of stroke after ablation, and (3) increased rates of stroke among persons  with a CHA2DS2-V ASc score ≥2 who discontinue oral anticoagulation after  3 months, persons who have undergone catheter ablation AF should continue  guideline-directed oral anticoagulation beyond 3 months based on their stroke  risk, such as those with moderate-high risk of stroke. 8.4.5. Complications After AF Catheter Ablation— Complications of AF catheter  ablation occur in approximately 5% of patients, with most being vascular (Table 26).1– 4 However, several life-threatening complications may occur. Complications are more  common with annual operator procedures <25 patients and hospital procedures <50  patients.1 Some studies demonstrate a higher incidence of complications in women,1 but  the CABANA RCT did not.5 The most severe complication is an LA to esophageal fistula,  which is often fatal but quite rare. Another life-threatening complication is pericardial  tamponade, but this can usually be treated with prompt pericardiocentesis. Clinically  significant strokes and TIAs are observed in <1% of patients.1–4 Deaths during ablations  are typically from tamponade but may occur with strokes.1–4 Phrenic and vagal nerve paralysis are seen with cryoablation but are less common in  radiofrequency ablation.2 Early reports of PV stenosis were largely due to ablation inside  the veins; with antral ablation this is rarely seen. The most common complications include  bruising and bleeding at the vascular access site. Less common vascular complications  include damage to the arterial or venous system or an atrioventricular fistula requiring  surgery. 8.5. Role of Pacemakers and ICDs for the Prevention and Treatment of AF Recommendations for the Role of Pacemakers and ICDs for the Prevention and Treatment of  AF Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 A 1. In patients with bradycardia requiring cardiac-implanted electronic devices who have  normal atrioventricular conduction, device selection and programming strategies to maintain  atrioventricular synchrony and minimize ventricular pacing should be used to reduce the  incidence and progression of AF.1–6 et al. Page 98 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

COR LOE Recommendations 2b B-NR 2. In selected patients with a pacemaker and symptomatic atrial tachyarrhythmias,  antitachycardia atrial pacing and ventricular pacing minimization may be useful for reducing  symptoms.7–13 2b C-LD 3. In patients with AF who require significant ventricular pacing, conduction system pacing  may be useful to reduce progression of AF.14,15 3: No  benefit B-R 4. In patients with AF, specialized atrial pacing algorithms designed to suppress AF are not  useful for reducing the incidence or slowing the progression of AF.12,16–18 Synopsis—In patients with pacemakers, programming strategies to reduce RV pacing  reduce the incidence of AF.1–6 Because AF is observed in patients with symptomatic sinus  node dysfunction who require permanent pacemakersfor rate support, pacing algorithms  were designed 20 to 30 years ago to suppress atrial ectopy but, unfortunately, no algorithm  was able to successfully reduce AF in RCTs.12,16–19 More recently, antitachycardia pacing  algorithms have been designed to identify and terminate atrial arrhythmias and have been  moderately effective in patients with arrhythmias associated with more organized atrial  activation due to reentry.7–13 Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. Several randomized and nonrandomized studies have shown that in patients who  require cardiac-implanted electronic devices for sinus node dysfunction who  have intact atrioventricular conduction, devices that maintain atrioventricular  synchrony reduce the incidence and progression of AF.1–6 Although maintenance  of atrioventricular synchrony is important, post hoc analysis of MOST and  a meta-analysis have demonstrated that the amount of ventricular pacing is  an important contributor to the development of AF.6,20 Algorithms designed  specifically to reduce ventricular pacing reduced the incidence of AF in  individual studies, but meta-analyses of RCTs suggests that the benefit may  extend only to those patients with very infrequent pacing (<10%).19,21–23 In the  only randomized study that solely evaluated patients with atrioventricular block  (and >70 years of age) who required permanent pacing, dual-chamber pacing did  not reduce the incidence of AF when compared with single-chamber ventricular  pacing.24 2. Several studies have reported that specialized antitachycardia pacing algorithms  can terminate atrial tachyarrhythmias but have not reduced AF burden.7–9  However, in a post hoc analysis of a subset of patients who had high success rate  of antitachycardia pacing (≥60%), antitachycardia pacing algorithms reduced the  overall AF/AT burden from 2.5 hours/day to 0.68 hours/day (P<0.01).10 A more  recent study (MINERV A [Minimize Right Ventricular Pacing to Prevent Atrial  Fibrillation and Heart Failure]) found a modestly effective pacing algorithm  that monitors for periods of regularization of atrial activity to initiate pacing  algorithms reduced progression to persistent AF.11,12 This algorithm may be  more effective in patients who have undergone previous AF ablation.13 et al. Page 99 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

3. Early nonrandomized evidence suggests that His bundle and left bundle pacing  may reduce AF incidence and progression when compared with RV pacing  in patients with high burden ventricular pacing.14,15 In 1 study, left bundle  branch area pacing reduced the incidence of new AF when compared with RV  pacing, but this benefit was only evident in those patients with ventricular pacing  >20%.14 However, a meta-analysis that has evaluated all published evidence has  only demonstrated a trend toward reduced AF. In 1 study, His bundle pacing  reduced the likelihood of development of persistent AF in patients with sinus  node dysfunction and a PR interval >180 ms.25 There is indirect evidence for  the potential benefit of the ventricular depolarization pattern for reducing AF  because an algorithm that automatically adjusts pacing parameters based on  intrinsic conduction has been associated with a decrease in longer AF episodes  (>48 hours) when compared with conventional programming in a retrospective  analysis.26–28 4. Several studies have evaluated atrial pacing algorithms to reduce AF.12,16–19  Pacing algorithms to minimize ventricular pacing in ATTEST (Atrial Therapy  Efficacy and Safety Trial), a combination of algorithms designed to suppress  AF and also provide antitachycardia pacing did not suppress atrial arrhythmias  in patients with paroxysmal AF (AF frequency 1.3 episodes/month when “on”  compared with 1.2 episodes/month when “off”).8 Despite optimistic results in  some studies,12 a meta-analysis found no benefit with atrial pacing algorithms  for reducing the incidence of AF.19 8.6. Surgical Ablation Recommendations for Surgical Ablation Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 2a B-R 1. For patients with AF who are undergoing cardiac surgery, concomitant surgical ablation can be  beneficial to reduce the risk of recurrent AF.1–3 2a B-NR 2. In patients undergoing surgical ablation, anticoagulation therapy is reasonable for at least 3  months after the procedure to reduce the risk of stroke or systemic embolism.2–4 2b B-R 3. For patients with symptomatic, persistent AF refractory to antiarrhythmic drug therapy a hybrid  epicardial and endocardial ablation might be reasonable to reduce the risk of recurrent atrial  arrhythmia.5–7 Synopsis—Among patients with AF or AFL, concomitant surgical ablation at the time of  cardiac surgery has been shown to reduce the risk of recurrent atrial arrhythmia. However, it  is associated with an increased risk of renal dysfunction and pacemaker placement. Among  patients with symptomatic, persistent AF, a hybrid procedure combining epicardial and  endocardial ablation has been shown to reduce the burden of atrial arrhythmia. Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. The original atrial maze procedure consisted of a biatrial lesion set derived from  a “cut-and-sew” technical approach.8 Similar lesion sets delivered by cryoenergy  et al. Page 100 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

or radiofrequency were subsequently developed. Surgical ablation concomitant  with cardiac surgery currently takes place in approximately 1 in 5 patients with  previous AF, most commonly at the time of a mitral valve procedure but also  during aortic and tricuspid procedures or CABG.9 In a Cochrane review of 22  clinical trials conducted between 1998 and 2013, there was evidence that surgical  ablation is associated with increased freedom from AF, AFL, or AT (RR, 2.04  [95% CI, 1.63–2.55]). However, risk of pacemaker placement was increased  (RR, 1.69 [95% CI, 1.12–2.54]).1,2 A subsequent trial of patients undergoing  mitral valve surgery with AF similarly found that ablation leads to increased  freedom from AF at 1 year (63.2% versus 29.4%; P<0.001) but with increased  risk of pacemaker placement (21.5 versus 8.1 per 100 patient-years; P=0.01).3  Observational data suggest surgical ablation is associated with increased survival  as well as risk of pacemaker placement and renal dysfunction.10–14 2. Two components of Virchow’s triad—endothelial injury and stasis of blood flow —can lead to a prothrombogenic milieu in the context of surgical ablation.  The former is a consequence of suture lines or ablation lesions, whether  they result from radiofrequency or cryoenergy. The latter can occur with  postcardioversion atrial stunning and/or atrial manipulation and consequent loss  of mechanical function. Accordingly, trial protocols for several key studies  of surgical ablation include the use of oral anticoagulation for at least 3  months after intervention.2,3 Nonrandomized data suggest that stroke or systemic  embolism in the first 3 months after catheter ablation is uncommon, but the  risk increases with discontinuation of oral anticoagulation, especially in high-risk  patients.4 Patients who undergo surgical ablation may be at similar risk, and  thus oral anticoagulation, whether it be with warfarin or a DOAC15 because  appropriate accounting for concomitant indications such as a mechanical heart  valve or mitral stenosis, should be initiated regardless of stroke risk when  adequate surgical hemostasis has been achieved. 3. In a randomized trial of 149 patients with symptomatic and refractory AF,  compared with catheter ablation, a hybrid procedure consisting of closed-chest,  epicardial ablation combined with and followed by endocardial ablation led  to increased freedom atrial arrhythmias, including AF, AFL, and AT at 12  months (67.7% versus 50.0%; P=0.036) at the expense of an increased risk  of major adverse events such as stroke, bleeding, or pericardial effusion (0.0%  versus 7.8%; P=0.0525).16 The ablation set of the hybrid procedure focused on  surgical ablation of the LA posterior wall and PVI, while endocardial ablation  completed PVI and addressed remaining gaps. Other observational studies of  hybrid procedures with limited sizes show comparable rates of AF-free survival  and safety.5–7 et al. Page 101 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

9. MANAGEMENT OF PATIENTS WITH HF 9.1. General Considerations for AF and HF AF and HF frequently coexist, and either can predispose to the development of the other.  Shared risk factors (eg, age, obesity, sedentary lifestyle, and hypertension) may contribute,  as may atrial remodeling and diastolic dysfunction.1–3 The prevalence of AF is higher in  patients with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction compared with HFrEF.4 In a  recent study of the Framingham cohort, among individuals with new AF, more than onethird (37%) had HF.5 Conversely, among individuals with new HF, more than half (57%)  had AF. A meta-analysis, including 53 969 patients from 9 observational and 7 randomized  trials, concluded that after adjusting for confounding factors, AF was associated with an  increased total mortality, irrespective of LV systolic dysfunction, with an OR of 1.40 (95%  CI, 1.32–1.48) in randomized trials and an OR of 1.14 (95% CI, 1.03–1.26) in observational  studies.6 The risk of mortality is higher when AF is incident after a diagnosis of HF as  compared with prevalent AF, and in patients with HFrEF compared with heart failure with  preserved ejection fraction.4,7–9 Special considerations for the management of patients with HF and AF are discussed  in the next section on management of AF in HF, as well as in Section 7.2  (“Specific Pharmacological Agents for Rate Control”) and Section 8.2 (“Electrical and  Pharmacological Cardioversion”). 9.2. Management of AF in Patients With HF Recommendations for Management of AF in Patients With HF* Referenced studies that  support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 B-NR 1. In patients who present with a new diagnosis of HFrEF and AF, arrhythmia-induced  cardiomyopathy should be suspected, and an early and aggressive approach to AF rhythm control  is recommended.1,2 1 A 2. In appropriate patients with AF and HFrEF who are on GDMT, and with reasonable  expectation of procedural benefit (Figure 24), catheter ablation is beneficial to improve  symptoms, QOL, ventricular function, and cardiovascular outcomes.3–13 2a B-NR 3. In appropriate patients with symptomatic AF and HFpEF with reasonable expectation of  benefit, catheter ablation can be useful to improve symptoms and improve QOL.14,15 2a B-R 4. In patients with AF and HF, digoxin is reasonable for rate control, in combination with other  rate-controlling agents or as monotherapy if other agents are not tolerated.16,17 2a B-NR 5. In patients with AF and HF with rapid ventricular rates in whom beta blockers or calcium  channel blockers are contraindicated or ineffective, intravenous amiodarone is reasonable for  acute rate control.†18,19 2a B-R 6. In patients with AF, HFrEF (LVEF <50%), and refractory rapid ventricular response who are  not candidates for or in whom rhythm control has failed, A VNA and biventricular pacing therapy  can be useful to improve symptoms, QOL, and EF.20–23 2a B-NR 7 In patients with AF, HF, and implanted biventricular pacing therapy in whom an effective  pacing percentage cannot be achieved with pharmacological therapy, A VNA can be beneficial to  improve functional class,24,25 reduce the risk of ICD shock,26 and improve survival.24,25 2a B-NR 8. In patients with AF-induced cardiomyopathy who have recovered LV function, long-term  surveillance can be beneficial to detect recurrent AF in view of the high risk of recurrence of  arrhythmia-induced cardiomyopathy.27,28 et al. Page 102 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

COR LOE Recommendations 2b B-NR 9. In patients with suspected AF-induced cardiomyopathy or refractory HF symptoms undergoing  pharmacological rate-control therapy for AF, a stricter rate-control strategy (target heart rate <80  bpm at rest and <110 bpm during moderate exercise) may be reasonable.29–31 2b C-LD 10. In patients with AF and HFrEF who undergo A VNA, conduction system pacing of the His  bundle or left bundle branch area may be reasonable as an alternative to biventricular pacing to  improve symptoms, QOL, and LV function.32–35 3: Harm B-R 11. In patients with AF and known LVEF <40%, nondihydropyridine calcium channel-blocking  drugs should not be administered because of their potential to exacerbate HF.36 3: Harm B-R 12. For patients with AF, dronedarone should not be administered for maintenance of sinus  rhythm to those with NYHA class III and IV HF or patients who have had an episode of  decompensated HF in the past 4 weeks, due to the risk of increased early mortality associated  with worsening HF.37 *Please see other recommendations on anticoagulation in AF (Section 8.4.4, “Anticoagulation Therapy Before and After  Catheter Ablation”), rate control in HF (Section 7, “Rate Control”), and agents for pharmacological cardioversion (Section  7.2, “Specific Pharmacological Agents for Rate Control”) and maintenance of sinus rhythm (Section 8.3.1, “Specific Drug  Therapy for Long-Term Maintenance of Sinus Rhythm”). †Consider the risk of cardioversion and stroke when using amiodarone as a rate-control agent. Synopsis—AF is the most common cause of arrhythmia-induced cardiomyopathy,27,38  a condition where persistent AF, with or without rapid ventricular rates, can lead to LV  dysfunction and HF that can be partially or completely reversed with adequate arrhythmia  control.39 AF can either be the only reason for cardiomyopathy (AF-induced) or can  exacerbate LV dysfunction and HF in a patient with concomitant structural heart disease  (AF-mediated).38,39 Medical therapies for rate control (Section 7) or rhythm control (Section  8) of AF have special considerations in patients with HF based on differential safety.  Routine pharmacological rhythm compared with rate control has not demonstrated benefit  on clinical outcomes in patients with HFrEF,29,40 although a recent subgroup analysis of  patients with HF (most heart failure with preserved ejection fraction) demonstrated benefit  of early rhythm control compared to rate control on clinical outcomes.1 Several trials have  compared AF catheter ablation with medical therapy in patients with HFrEF. Although  earlier trials were small and focused on endpoints such as improvement in LVEF, QOL, and  6-minute walk, 2 of the largest trials have shown a benefit in reducing mortality rate and HF  hospitalization.3–13 Patients with AF and HF may undergo A VNA for rate control refractory  to medical therapy.20,21 Similar to findings in patients who undergo pacemaker implantation  for conduction system disease, patients with HF appear to be more likely to develop or  have worsened cardiomyopathy related to RV pacing dyssynchrony41,42 and have improved  outcomes with biventricular or conduction system pacing.23,32,33,35 Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. It can be difficult to determine the extent of the contribution of AF to  cardiomyopathy and new onset HFrEF. Allowing AF to persist long term,  regardless of reasonable rate control, may result in worsening HF and  cardiomyopathy. An early and aggressive approach to rhythm control can  reduce AF burden, resulting in favorable ventricular remodeling and halting of  any occult arrhythmia-induced cardiomyopathy. In a prespecified subanalysis  of 798 HF patients (NYHA class II/III or LVEF <50%) in EAST-AFNET  et al. Page 103 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

(HFpEF, 442; midrange, 211; HFrEF [<40%], 132), early rhythm control  significantly improved the composite outcome of death, stroke, or hospitalization  for worsening of HF or for ACS (early rhythm control, 94/396; 5.7/100 patientyears) versus usual care (130/402; 7.9/100 patient-years; HR, 0.74 [95% CI,  0.56–0.97]; P=0.03), and this was not altered by HF status. Safety outcomes  in each group were comparable. However, only 17% of the HF population  had LVEF <40%.1 In a post hoc analysis of the CASTLE-AF trial, an AF  burden <50% at 6 months postcatheter ablation was associated with significant  improvement in the mortality rate and HF hospitalization in patients with AF and  HFrEF.2 2. Multiple RCTs in HFrEF have shown that in patients with symptoms due to  AF, ablation improves symptoms and QOL compared with a rate control or  an antiarrhythmic drug strategy.3–13 In each of 3 meta-analyses, QOL was  improved.3,10,13 Although in the past a trial of antiarrhythmic drugs was advised  before pursuing catheter ablation, current data support ablation for AF as firstline therapy even before antiarrhythmic drugs; often patients require both. Data  on LVEF, hospitalizations, and mortality rates are less robust, but nearly every  larger RCT does show some benefit in these outcomes (Table 27). Characteristics  that may identify patients with a higher likelihood of success or failure with AF  catheter ablation are listed in Figure 24.43 3. Data for AF catheter ablation are far less robust for HFpEF. The largest analysis  for this group of patients was a subanalysis of the CABANA trial of patients  with HF; in this subgroup analysis, 778 patients (35% of the study population)  enrolled in the study who had NYHA class II HF experienced improvement  in survival, freedom from AF recurrence, and improved QOL compared with  the medical therapy group.14 Most of these had HFpEF. In this subanalysis,  catheter ablation was associated with a reduction in the mortality rate and HF. A  meta-analysis on catheter ablation in patients with HFpEF that included 7 studies  and 764 patients showed the ablation to be safe and effective and associated with  lower hospitalizations and the mortality rate.15 4. A small RCT in patients with persistent AF and HF (most HFrEF) compared  the effects of digoxin, carvedilol, and the combination.16 Combination therapy  was associated with better rate control and symptom relief than monotherapy.  The RATE-AF trial randomized 160 patients (≥60 years of age) with persistent  AF and HF (81% with LVEF ≥50%) to digoxin or bisoprolol.17 No significant  difference was noted in the primary endpoint of QOL at 6 months. Secondary  outcomes, including natriuretic peptide levels, were significantly lower in the  digoxin group, without a significant difference in resting heart rate at 12 months.  Adverse effects were less common in the digoxin group. Observational and post  hoc analyses have suggested an excess mortality with digoxin in patients with  AF; however, residual confounding due to the use of digoxin in sicker patients  may have a role.44 In patients with HF on digoxin chronically, post hoc analyses  have suggested increased mortality rates and hospitalization with serum digoxin  levels ≥1 ng/mL; levels <0.8 ng/mL in HF were associated with the lowest  et al. Page 104 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

mortality rate, although the study was for therapy of HF and not AF.45 In the  DAAF (Digitalis in Acute Atrial Fibrillation) trial of 239 patients (12% with  HF), intravenous digoxin led to a significant decrease in heart rate at 2 hours  compared with placebo. 5. In trials of critically ill patients, some of which included a smaller proportion  of patients with HF, intravenous amiodarone has been shown to be effective in  controlling ventricular rates.18,19,46 In a randomized trial of 60 such patients (13  with HF), significant rate control was achieved with both intravenous diltiazem  and intravenous amiodarone. However, intravenous diltiazem was associated  with a significantly higher frequency of hypotension requiring discontinuation.19  In another retrospective study of 38 patients admitted to the intensive care unit (9  with HF), intravenous amiodarone was associated with a statistically significant  decrease in ventricular rate without decrease in BP (and in some cases improved  hemodynamics) compared with intravenous diltiazem and digoxin.18 Intravenous  beta blockers may also cause hypotension and may not be tolerated in patients  with HF and hemodynamic instability. Although less frequent, intravenous  amiodarone can also be associated with hypotension, specifically with the  intravenous bolus. The possibility of conversion to sinus rhythm with intravenous  amiodarone and associated potential for thromboembolism, especially in patients  with longer-standing AF not on anticoagulation, should factor into the riskbenefit decision when intravenous amiodarone is chosen for rate control. 6. Small RCTs of patients with medically refractory AF and HF show that  patients who undergo A VNA and conventional pacemaker implantation are less  symptomatic and have improvements in QOL and exercise tolerance compared  with subjects who are managed with medical rate control.20–22,47 A metaanalysis comparing outcomes with A VNA or medications showed, in 2 studies  analyzing patients with reduced EF, a modest, yet significant +4% increase in  EF in patients undergoing A VNA and RV pacing, while patients with normal  EF at baseline did not show a significant change.48 A meta-analysis of 93  studies including 11 343 patients who underwent A VNA with either RV pacing  or biventricular pacing showed periprocedural complications of arrhythmia,  HF, and lead dislodgement in 2% to 2.5%,49 few long-term data, and worse  outcomes in younger patients with reduced EF and RV pacing.49 Overall, these  data showed improved mortality in patients with HF who are treated with  cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT), at the risk of increased device-related  complications.49 The APAF-CRT (Ablate and Pace in Atrial Fibrillation plus  Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy) mortality trial of 133 subjects with AF,  HF, and narrow QRS was stopped early due to a HR of 0.26 for all-cause  mortality, also suggesting that when A VNA is performed in patients with HF,  CRT is preferable to conventional RV pacing.23 Data are accumulating regarding  similarly improved outcomes with conduction system pacing compared with  conventional RV pacing in this population.32–35 7. Conduction of AF may hinder delivery of biventricular pacing therapy (CRT)  and worsen outcomes.25 Initial clinical trials of CRT included low numbers  et al. Page 105 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

of patients with AF,50 and observational analyses suggested a reduced benefit  of CRT in patients with AF due to ineffective biventricular pacing.51,52 A  systematic review to evaluate the impact of A VNA in patients with AF and CRT  found A VNA was associated with significant reductions in all-cause mortality  (RR, 0.42 [95% CI, 0.26–0.68]), cardiovascular mortality (RR, 0.44 [95% CI,  0.24–0.81]), and improvement in NYHA class (RR, −0.52 [95% CI, −0.87 to  −0.17]).24 Confirmatory evidence of the importance of adequate biventricular  pacing percentage is provided by an analysis of remote monitoring data showing  a strong association between increasing percentages of biventricular pacing and  reduced mortality, with the greatest magnitude reduction at >98% pacing.53  In a systematic review and meta-analysis of 31 studies in 83 571 individuals,  CRT alone did not improve the mortality rate in patients with AF, but the  all-cause mortality rate was lower in the A VNA group.25 Many patients with  CRT devices also have combined defibrillator therapy. In a pooled analysis of  664 patients with AF and CRT in whom 282 underwent A VNA, a significant  reduction in appropriate and inappropriate ICD shocks and a decrease in allcause hospitalizations was associated with A VNA.26 8. In an observational study of 24 patients with AF-induced cardiomyopathy  and NYHA class III/IV HF, the median time from onset of arrhythmia to  cardiomyopathy and HF was 4.2 years. Aggressive rate/rhythm control resulted  in significant LVEF recovery in all patients within 6 months. Five of 24 patients  had recurrent AF, and all had a rapid decline in LVEF within 6 months after  arrhythmia recurrence.27 In an observational cohort of 69 patients with AF  and LVEF <40% who underwent catheter ablation, patients who maintained  sinus rhythm (65%) had complete LV function recovery and maintained normal  LVEF over 28±11 months of follow-up, compared with those who had recurrent  AF/AT.28 Long-term surveillance to detect recurrent AF can be beneficial and  can be accomplished by various modalities, including wearable devices, smart  watches, random monitoring (Holter, event, mobile telemetry), and implantable  loop recorders. 9. In patients with arrhythmia-induced cardiomyopathy and HFrEF, the ideal target  heart rate for rate control remains uncertain. However, because of the potential  negative impact of rapid ventricular rates on HF and cardiomyopathy, a stricter  rate-control strategy may be reasonable. In the AF-CHF trial, which compared  rate control versus rhythm control using antiarrhythmic therapy in AF and  HFrEF, the target rate control was defined as ventricular rate <80 bpm during  resting 12-lead electrocardiography and <110 bpm during a 6-minute walk test.29  In the RACE II trial, 614 patients with permanent AF were randomized to a  heart rate <80 bpm at rest and <110 bpm during moderate exercise or lenient  control (resting heart rate, <110 bpm), with results showing similar outcomes  in each arm. However, RACE II trial patients were rate controlled at enrollment  (baseline heart rate, 96 bpm), and only 15% of the study cohort had an LVEF  <40%, plus very few patients had heart rates >100 bpm, even in the lenient rate  control gorup.54 In a crossover study of 20 patients with persistent AF and LVEF  et al. Page 106 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

<40%, patients were given escalating doses of metoprolol (average dose, 121  mg) to get target heart rate <70 bpm. After 3 months, average resting heart rate  decreased from 94±14 bpm to 85±12 bpm, but no significant differences in QOL  on functional status were noted.31 Strict rate control is also advisable in patients  with ICDs and CRT (See Table 20 in Section 7.1, “Broad Considerations for  Rate Control”).55,56 10. In small observational series of patients undergoing A VNA and His bundle  pacing, postprocedural increase in EF and improved functional class has  been demonstrated, at the expense of increased pacing thresholds in some  patients.32,35 A single-center study comparing outcomes after A VNA with His  bundle pacing and left bundle area pacing in 105 patients showed a higher  rate of recurrent A VN conduction in the His bundle pacing group and longer  fluoroscopy time.33 Acute threshold rise, exit block, and elevated long-term  thresholds were also seen in the His bundle pacing group but not in left bundle  area pacingin follow-up limited to 10.5 months. Both strategies were associated  with a significantly improved EF in patients with EF <50% at baseline (N=16;  37%±7.6% versus 46%±13%; P=0.02).33 An observational comparative study of  patients undergoing A VNA, of whom 113 had RV (56) or BiV (57) pacing and  110 had conduction system pacing (84 His bundle pacing and 46 left bundle area  pacing) showed increased EF in conduction system pacing compared with the  mixed RV/BivP group (46.5%±14.2% to 51.9%±11.2%; P=0.02) in conduction  system pacing and 36.4%±16.1% to 39.5%±16% (P=0.04) in RV/BiVP.34 A  combined endpoint of time to death or HF hospitalization was reduced in the  conduction system pacing group in >2 years of follow-up, but extrapolation  is limited due to the observational and selected nature of the population and  because the RV/BiVP group had lower EF and wider QRS at baseline.34 11. The nondihydropyridine calcium channel block-ers—diltiazem and verapamil— are negative inotropic agents and may not be tolerated in patients with HFrEF.  In the acute setting, limited data from 2 retrospective analyses suggest the  potential for increased morbidity with the use of diltiazem in patients with  HFrEF, including worsening HF, need for inotropic support, or acute kidney  injury.57,58 In the chronic setting, diltiazem had no impact on mortality in a  trial of patients with nonischemic cardiomyopathy.59 However, in the multicenter  randomized MDPIT of patients postacute MI, HF and cardiac events (cardiac  death or nonfatal reinfarction) were more frequent in the patients with LVEF  <40% or pulmonary congestion who were randomized to diltiazem. Among  those with a baseline EF of <40%, late HF appeared in 12% receiving placebo  and 21% receiving diltiazem (P=0.004). Life table analysis in patients with an EF  of <40% confirmed more frequent late HF in those taking diltiazem (P=0.0017).  In addition, the diltiazem-associated increase in the frequency of late HF was  progressively greater with decreasing baseline EF.36 This increase in late HF was  not seen in patients with pulmonary congestion at baseline but an EF of ≥40%,  suggesting the association of diltiazem-related late HF was present only in those  with systolic LV dysfunction. et al. Page 107 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

12. The ANDROMEDA37 study was a randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled  study that tested the hypothesis that dronedarone would reduce the rate of  hospitalization due to HF and possibly reduce mortality by reducing the  incidence of arrhythmic death. The study enrolled patients who were hospitalized  with new or worsening HF and who had at least 1 episode of NYHA class III  or IV HF (shortness of breath on minimal exertion or at rest). More than 40%  of the patients had NYHA class II HF at baseline. The investigators reported  that, contrary to the study’s hypothesis, mortality was higher in the dronedarone  group compared to that in the placebo group (8.1% versus 3.8%; HR, 2.13 [95%  CI, 1.07–4.25]; P=0.03). The excess mortality was principally associated with  worsening HF. 10. AF AND SPECIFIC PATIENT GROUPS 10.1. Management of Early Onset AF, Including Genetic Testing Recommendations for Management of Early Onset AF, Including Genetic Testing Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 2b B-NR 1. In patients with an onset of unexplained AF before 30 years of age, electrophysiological study  to evaluate and treat reentrant supraventricular tachyarrhythmias with a targeted ablation may be  reasonable because of the high prevalence of reentrant arrhythmias in this group.1–3 2b B-NR 2. In patents with an onset of AF before 45 years of age without obvious risk factors for AF,  referral for genetic counseling, genetic testing for rare pathogenic variants, and surveillance for  cardiomyopathy or arrhythmia syndromes may be reasonable.4,5 Synopsis—Young patients are less likely to develop AF or associated strokes compared  with older populations. Consumer-driven use of wearable devices is increasing and can  lead to the diagnosis of AF at a young age.6 In those <30 years of age, reentrant SVTs  (atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia and atrioventricular reentrant tachycardia) are  found in about 25% of patients.1–3 Targeted ablation of the reentrant tachycardia is followed  by resolution of AF episodes in most of these young patients. However, additional factors  need to be taken into consideration in young patients who present with AF. Growing  evidence suggests that, in addition to risk factors for AF present in older populations,  young patients who develop AF may also harbor susceptibility for inherited ion channel  and cardiomyopathic disorders,4 even in those with normal echocardiograms.5 In addition to  the standard workup for newly diagnosed AF, genetic testing for rare pathogenic variation,  advanced imaging modalities, and surveillance screening could detect otherwise occult  cardiomyopathy. Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. Two retrospective observational cohort studies included patients with onset  of AF before the age of 21 years2 and 30 years1 who underwent  electrophysiological study to assess for reentrant SVTs. The former study found  atrioventricular node reentry tachycardia or atrioventricular reentry tachycardia  et al. Page 108 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

in 39% of patients and the latter in 24%. In both studies, after targeted ablation  of the reentry tachycardia, patients were observed for recurrence of AF for a  median of about 1.5 years. The former study reported no recurrences of AF,  and the latter study reported that 86% remained free of atrial arrhythmias. In  an additional prospective cohort study of patients referred for AF ablation who  had inducible atrioventricular node reentry tachycardia, 12 of 13 patients who  underwent slow pathway ablation without PVI had no recurrence of AF after a  mean follow-up of 21 months.3 2. A prospective observational cohort study in patients with AF diagnosed before  the age of 66 years and who had sequencing of genes typically found in ion  channelopathy and cardiomyopathy panels reported that among 1293 patients  studied, 10% (131) were found to have a disease-associated variant, primarily in  cardiomyopathy-related genes.4 In 1 study of 23 unrelated patients with onset of  AF at <45 years of age who had a normal echocardiogram and no other readily  identifiable causes of AF, 24% had a pathogenic or likely pathogenic variant  identified. Most of these were also in cardiomyopathy-related genes.5 10.2. Athletes Recommendation for Athletes Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendation 2a B-NR 1. In athletes who develop AF, catheter ablation with PVI is a reasonable strategy for rhythm control  because of its effectiveness and low risk of detrimental effect on exercise capacity.1,2 Synopsis—Engaging in moderate levels of exercise has several cardiovascular benefits  and, in some studies, has been associated with a lower incidence of AF.3,4 However,  high-volume endurance athleticism, defined here as exercise of >45 metabolic equivalenthours per week, has been associated with a higher prevalence of AF,5 particularly in  young athletes.6 The mechanisms behind this association are not well established but  may be related to atrial myopathy from exercise-induced stretch or perhaps inflamation.7,8  No studies have prospectively studied the effects of detraining on AF burden, but some  have proposed that moderation of exercise may be considered, although it is unclear  whether changes are reversible.9 Nevertheless, athletes will often choose to continue sport  participation, and aggressive rhythm control strategies are often sought. Because many of  these patients are young, medications are often not tolerated or preferred. PVI has been  shown to be safe and effective in this population without resulting in a significant reduction  in exercise capacity1 and has been shown to significantly improve QOL.2 Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. In a prospective cohort study of 144 athletes, AF ablation with PVI, including  multiple procedures, resulted in freedom from AF at 1 year in 86% of athletes  with paroxysmal AF and 68% of athletes with persistent AF over a median  et al. Page 109 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

follow-up of 3 years.1 Athletes underwent cardiopulmonary exercise stress  testing before and after ablation and, although the sinus rate increased on  average 10 bpm after ablation (which may bother some athletes and thus should  be discussed before the procedure), no significant changes were observed in  maximum metabolic equivalents on exercise treadmill testing. In a retrospective  cohort study of 133 competitive athletes who underwent catheter ablation for AF  with 10-year follow-up, 83% of athletes did not have recurrent events and had  significantly improved QOL scores.2 10.3. Management Considerations in Patients With AF and Obesity Obesity is a strong risk factor for AF.1 In the Framingham Study, overweight and obesity  increased the risk of incident AF, with a 4% increase in AF risk per unit increase in BMI  in men and women. Adjusted HRs for AF associated with obesity were 1.52 (95% CI,  1.09–2.13; P=0.02) and 1.46 (95% CI, 1.03–2.07; P=0.03) for men and women, respectively,  compared with individuals with normal BMI. In that study, the excess risk of AF associated  with obesity appeared to be mediated through LA dilatation.2 Other studies suggest that the  risk of AF with obesity is mediated through epicardial and abdominal fat, or structural  changes in the atria.1,3 Obesity is also associated with other comorbidities, including  hypertension, HF, and sleep apnea, which themselves predispose to an increased incidence  of AF. Further, higher BMI and obesity are associated with an increase in the burden of  AF, including progression from paroxysmal to permanent AF, and an increased risk of AF  recurrence after AF ablation.4 Special considerations for the management of AF in patients  with obesity include the role of weight loss in the primary and secondary prevention of  AF (Section 5, “Lifestyle and Risk Factor Modification for AF Management”), as well as  anticoagulation in patients with severe or class III obesity in this section and in Section 10.4  (“Anticoagulation Considerations in Patients With Class III Obesity”). 10.4. Anticoagulation Considerations in Patients With Class III Obesity Recommendations for Anticoagulation Considerations in Patients With Class III Obesity Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 2a B-NR 1. In patients with AF and class III obesity (BMI ≥ 40 kg/m2), DOACs are reasonable to choose over  warfarin for stroke risk reduction.1–5 2b C-LD 2. In patients with AF who have undergone bariatric surgery, warfarin may be reasonable to choose  over DOACs for stroke risk reduction in view of concerns about DOAC drug absorption.6,7 Synopsis—Patients with class III obesity (BMI ≥40 kg/m2) are underrepresented in the  major clinical trials evaluating the efficacy and safety of DOACs in patients with AF. Post  hoc analyses of major DOAC trials in AF and large observational studies have shown  comparable efficacy and safety of DOACs compared with warfarin across weight groups,  including patients with class III obesity.1–5 Thus, DOACs are preferred over warfarin for  stroke risk prevention in patients with class III obesity and AF. Little evidence is available  that evaluates the pharmacokinetics, efficacy, and safety of DOACs in patients with AF who  et al. Page 110 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

have undergone bariatric surgery. Thus, warfarin may be reasonable to choose over DOACs  to reduce stroke risk in this population until further data become available. Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. Post hoc analyses of the ARISTOTLE (apixaban versus warfarin), ROCKET  AF (rivaroxaban versus warfarin), and ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48 (edoxaban versus  warfarin) demonstrated consistent efficacy (stroke and systemic embolism) and  safety (major bleeding) of DOACs compared with warfarin across weight groups  in patients with AF.3–5 A meta-analysis including these trials and RE-LY  (dabigatran versus warfarin) again showed similar efficacy and safety of DOACs  compared with warfarin, although the outcome differences were attenuated in  obese patients.2 A large retrospective observational study including 36 094  patients compared risk of ischemic stroke, significant bleeding, and mortality  in patients receiving a DOAC or warfarin, stratified by BMI group.1 For all 3  endpoints, better outcomes were observed with DOACs across BMI groups. In  patients with a BMI ≥40 kg/m2, a relative risk reduction of 25% for ischemic  stroke (adjusted HR, 0.75 [95% CI, 0.64–0.87]; P<0.001), 57% for significant  bleeding (adjusted HR, 0.43 [95% CI, 0.20–0.94]; P<0.001), and 34% for allcause mortality (adjusted HR, 0.66 [95% CI, 0.56–0.77]; P<0.001) was observed  with DOACs compared with warfarin. 2. Although case reports exist that demonstrate expected factor Xa trough levels in  patients taking a DOAC who undergo bariatric surgery, a meta-analysis of cohort  studies, case series, and case reports has shown that 42% of patients who have  undergone bariatric surgery had peak drug levels below the expected range.6,7  Patients who have undergone bariatric surgery are not well represented in any  of the major trials comparing DOACs with warfarin, and few observational  data support DOAC use in this population. Warfarin’s therapeutic effect can be  routinely monitored. Thus, in patients with AF who have undergone bariatric  surgery, warfarin may be a reasonable choice over DOACs for stroke risk  reduction at this time. 10.5. AF and VHD VHD and AF commonly coexist. AF independently predicts the risk of cerebrovascular  events among patients with valve disease.1 This risk may be addressed with the use of  oral anticoagulation, percutaneous and surgical LAAO, and surgical ablation as described in  Sections 6.5.1 (“Percutaneous Approaches to Occlude the LAA”), 6.5.2 (“Cardiac Surgery —LAA Exclusion/Excision”), and 6.8.5 (“AF in VHD”). et al. Page 111 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

10.6. WPW and Preexcitation Syndromes Recommendations for WPW and Preexcitation Syndromes Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 B-NR 1. Patients with AF with rapid anterograde conduction (preexcited AF), and hemodynamic  instability should be treated with electrical cardioversion.1,2 1 B-NR 2. For patients with AF with rapid anterograde conduction (preexcited AF), catheter ablation of  accessory pathways (APs) is recommended.3–7 1 C-LD 3. In patients with AF with rapid anterograde conduction (preexcited AF) and hemodynamic  stability, pharmacological cardioversion with intravenous ibutilide or intravenous procainamide is  recommended as an alternative to elective cardioversion.1,8,9 3: Harm B-NR 4. For patients with AF with anterograde accessory pathway conduction (preexcited AF),  pharmacological agents that block atrioventricular nodal conduction (verapamil, diltiazem,  amiodarone, digoxin, adenosine, or beta blockers) are contraindicated due to risk of precipitating  VF or hemodynamic deterioration.10–14 Synopsis—WPW and preexcitation syndromes refer to the presence of extraatrioventricular nodal connection(s) between atrium and ventricle; such APs are comprised  of atrial tissue.15 AF occurs in approximately 15% of persons with WPW and although the  mechanism(s) remain unclear, the faster conduction properties of atrial tissue compared with  the atrioventricular node allow for rapid rates in preexcited AF.15–17 The risk of preexcited  AF is higher for those with multiple pathways and short antegrade pathway refractory period  (<250 ms), which allows rapid conduction and predisposes to VF and sudden death.1,18,19  Moreover, AF in young persons without evidence of comorbid conditions may be associated  with an AP, and pathway ablation is definitive therapy for AF and SVT in these persons.1  For those who cannot undergo ablation, preventive pharmacological therapy is directed to  slowing pathway conduction.20,21 Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. Preexcited AF can conduct rapidly over the pathway and lead to VF. During  an acute episode of preexcited AF with rapid ventricular response and  hemodynamic instability, electrical cardioversion must be used to restore sinus  rhythm.1,2 2. Pathway ablation has well-established efficacy and safety for those with  preexcited AF for prevention of VF.1 Multiple large-patient series point to a high  success rate (93%-95%) balanced with low risk of major short- and long-term  complications.3–7 Electrophysiological study and AP ablation can be offered as  first-line therapy. 3. Pharmacological treatments that increase the refractory period of atrial tissue  (ie, ibutilide or procainamide) can slow AP conduction and terminate AF.  Hemodynamically stable patients presenting with preexcited AF with or without  rapid ventricular rates can be pharmacologically managed with such agents.8,9  In 1 study involving 22 patients, ibutilide terminated AF in 21 patients and  et al. Page 112 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

prolonged refractoriness of the atrioventricular node, His-Purkinje system, and  AP.9 4. AP conduction can accelerate with atrioventricular nodal block. Administration  of pharmacological agents that block atrioventricular nodal conduction can  increase the risk of VF. The use of atrioventricular nodal blocking agents  for patients with preexcited AF are potentially harmful due to the risk of  accelerated pathway conduction and associated VF.1,10–12 One small series  that reviewed intravenous amiodarone for this indication raised significant  concerns in view of several published reports on instances of VF precipitated by  amiodarone.13 In 1 study of patients with WPW who received verapamil during  electrophysiological study, verapamil decreased the shortest RR interval between  preexcited ventricular complexes during AF, and 2 patients deteriorated and  required cardioversion.14 Data are very limited and observational, but because  other safer options are readily available, atrioventricular nodal agents are best  avoided in this setting. 10.7. Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy The “AHA/ACC Guideline for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Patients With Hypertrophic  Cardiomyopathy” was published in December 2020, and this guideline included  recommendations on AF.1 Data on AF in patients with HCM published since the 2020  hypertrophic cardiomyopathy guideline were reviewed but did not result in any substantive  changes in the recommendations from 2020.2–6 AF is highly prevalent in HCM and  increases the risk of stroke. The CHA2DS2-V ASc score should not apply to patients with  HCM, because they have roughly an equivalent risk to a CHADs-V ASc of 3. Data on  the use of DOACs in patients with HCM suggest these to be acceptable alternatives to  warfarin. When a rhythm-control strategy is needed, several antiarrhythmic drugs have  been shown to be safe and effective, allowing for individualization according to underlying  substrate and patient preference. Catheter ablation is also an important option, although  more confirmatory studies have shown AF ablation is of lower success compared with  patients without HCM.7 For specifics, please see the “2020 AHA/ACC Guideline for the  Diagnosis and Treatment of Patients With Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.”1 10.8. Adult Congenital Heart Disease (ACHD) Recommendations for ACHD Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 B-NR 1. In adults with congenital heart disease and AF, it is recommended to evaluate for and treat  precipitating factors and reversible causes of AF, recognizing that residual hemodynamic sequelae  may contribute to the occurrence of the arrhythmia.1,2 1 C-LD 2. In adults with AF and moderate or complex congenital heart disease, electrophysiological  procedures should be performed by operators with expertise in ACHD procedures and in  collaboration with an ACHD cardiologist, ideally in specialized centers, when available.3–5 et al. Page 113 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

COR LOE Recommendations 1 C-LD 3. In adults with congenital heart disease and symptomatic or hemodynamically significant  paroxysmal or persistent AF, an initial strategy of rhythm control is recommended regardless of  lesion severity as AF in this population is often poorly tolerated.6 2a B-NR 4. In symptomatic patients with simple congenital heart disease with antiarrhythmic drug–refractory  AF, it is reasonable to choose ablation over long-term antiarrhythmic therapies.4,7 2b C-LD 5. In adults with congenital heart disease with AF undergoing PVI, it may be reasonable to include  an ablative strategy in the right atrium directed at reentrant arrhythmia secondary to atriotomy scars  and the CTI.8,9 2b C-LD 6. In adults with AF and moderate or severe forms of congenital heart disease, particularly those  with low-flow states such as Fontan circulation, blind-ending cardiac chambers, and cyanosis, it may  be reasonable to treat with anticoagulation independent of conventional risk score to reduce risk of  thromboembolic events.10 Synopsis—Atrial arrhythmias are a leading cause of morbidity in adults with congenital  heart disease, and AF surpasses intra-atrial reentrant tachycardia in patients with CHD >50  years of age.11 Risk factors for development of AF in patients with ACHD are similar  to those for the general population; however, the presence of an atrial septal defect is an  independent risk factor. Adults may be classified as having simple, moderate, or complex  forms of CHD, based on a classification proposed in the “2018 AHA/ACC Guideline for  the Management of Adults With Congenital Heart Disease.”12 Choosing pharmacological  therapy for treatment of patients with ACHD who have AF should consider factors such  as coexisting sinus node dysfunction or atrioventricular block, as well as the ventricular  function and other comorbidities. Ablation strategies established in normal hearts can  be applied to patients with simple forms of CHD; however, caution must be taken in  those patients with moderate or complex forms of ACHD.13 Knowledge of the underlying  congenital anatomy is key, because access to the atrial chambers may require specialized  approaches. In those patients with moderate or complex forms of CHD, electrophysiological  procedures should be performed by operators with expertise in CHD and in collaboration  with an ACHD cardiologist.3 Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. Adults with CHD often have hemodynamic sequelae of childhood repair, and any  new onset arrhythmia, including AF, should prompt an evaluation for treatable  and reversible causes. Studies have shown that AF is correlated with RA dilation,  thus necessitating addressing the underlying substrate in addition to treating the  arrhythmia.1,2 2. Patients with ACHD who are undergoing invasive electrophysiological  procedures in specialized ACHD centers generally have better outcomes,  including survival, than those managed in other care settings.3–5 Special attention  is required to ensure appropriate periprocedural care, including identification of  procedure-related risk factors and availability of ancillary imaging.12 3. Adults with simple forms of CHD and AF are generally managed according  to standard published guidelines. In those patients with moderate or complex  forms of CHD, choice of antiarrhythmic therapy should be individualized.6  Most antiarrhythmic drugs are associated with proarrhythmic effects and  et al. Page 114 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

increased mortality in ACHD patients.14 Rhythm control is generally preferred  over rate control in patients with ACHD with moderate or complex disease  who may tolerate AF poorly. Class I antiarrhythmic drugs must be avoided  in patients with ACHD with CAD or significant subpulmonary or systemic  ventricular dysfunction.14–16 Amiodarone is an effective antiarrhythmic agent for  maintaining sinus rhythm in patients with ACHD; however, long-term therapy  is limited by adverse effects, particularly amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis,  which is common in women with CHD, cyanotic CHD, and those with Fontan  physiology.17 Amiodarone should also be avoided in patients with ACHD who  have a BMI <21 kg/m2 due to the increased incidence of thyrotoxicosis in these  patients.18 Dofetilide may be a viable alternative to amiodarone in this complex  population.19 Extrapolating data from noncongenital populations, dronedarone is  best avoided in patients with ACHD who have moderate or complex disease or  significant ventricular dysfunction due to the increased risk of HF, stroke, and  death.20,21 4. Data on ablative strategies for AF in patients with ACHD are limited; however,  when performed by experienced centers, AF ablation in patients with simple  forms of CHD is safe.4,13 Knowledge of the underlying congenital anatomy is  key, as access to the atrial chambers may require different approaches, including  transseptal puncture. Patients with ACHD who have persistent AF have lower  success rates for ablation, and multiple procedures may be required.22 There are  insufficient data on the role, safety, and benefit of AF ablation in complex forms  of CHD. 5. PVI has a lower success rate in patients with ACHD than in patients with  structurally normal hearts. The operator should understand the variations in  systemic and pulmonary venous anatomy, such as a left superior vena cava,  which may be a trigger for AF.9 Due to related pathology in the right atrium of  patients with repaired complex ACHD, additional ablative therapies directed at  atriotomy scars and the CTI may be necessary. Cryoballoon ablation is a safe  option for patients with simple or moderate forms of CHD and AF.23,24 6. All patients with CHD should be considered for some form of thromboembolic  prophylaxis. Select groups of patients with CHD are at higher risks for  thromboembolic events, such as cyanotic lesions, those with low-flow states  (Fontan physiology), and those with blind-ending cardiac chambers. The  prevalence of cerebrovascular accidents in patients with ACHD is estimated to  be 10- to 100-fold higher than age-matched controls, and thromboembolic events  account for at least 4% of all-cause mortality in patients with CHD.25 Increased  complexity of CHD is associated with thromboembolic events, but CHA2DS2  and CHA2DS2-V ASc scores are not predictive of thromboembolic risk in patients  with ACHD; therefore, therapies must be individualized.10 Limited data are  available for the use of DOACs in patients with ACHD, but in a survey, they  appeared to be safe and effective.26 et al. Page 115 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

10.9. Prevention and Treatment of AF After Cardiac Surgery 10.9.1. Prevention of AF After Cardiac Surgery Recommendations for Prevention of AF After Cardiac Surgery Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 2a B-R 1. In patients undergoing cardiac surgery who are at high risk for postoperative AF, it is reasonable  to administer short-term prophylactic beta blockers or amiodarone to reduce the incidence of  postoperative AF.1–5 2a B-R 2. In patients undergoing CABG, aortic valve, or ascending aortic aneurysm operations, it is  reasonable to perform concomitant posterior left pericardiotomy to reduce the incidence of  postoperative AF.6,7 Synopsis: New-onset AF after cardiac surgery is common and has been associated with  increased risks of late mortality and stroke.8 Trials of prophylactic amiodarone and beta  blockers have demonstrated effectiveness reducing the occurrence of new AF, but not in  all studies. Building off previous studies, the PALACS (Effect of Posterior Pericardiotomy  on the Incidence of Atrial Fibrillation After Cardiac Surgery) randomized trial studied  the use of posterior left pericardiotomy7 and found significant reduction of AF in the  treated group (17% versus 32% no intervention group; P=0.0007; OR, 0.44). Colchicine has  shown uncertain benefit based on the results of more recent studies compared with earlier  encouraging trials. Drug adverse effects result in frequent drug discontinuation.9–11 Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. Preoperative prophylaxis with beta blockers or amiodarone has shown mixed  benefit, and studies are difficult to compare because of variable medication  combinations.1–5 One double-blind RCT of 601 patients listed for nonemergency  CABG surgery and/or valve replacement/repair surgery showed a significant  reduction of AF with amiodarone. 2. A meta-analysis and RCT showed that the incidence of postoperative AF was  significantly lower in patients treated with posterior left pericardiotomy during  their cardiac procedure; however, the studies did not include patients undergoing  mitral or tricuspid procedures.6,7 10.9.2. Treatment of AF After Cardiac Surgery Recommendations for Treatment of AF After Cardiac Surgery Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 A* 1. In postoperative cardiac surgery patients, beta blockers* are recommended to achieve rate control  for AF1–4 unless contraindicated or ineffective in which case a nondihydropyridine calcium channel  blocker† is recommended.5B-Rt 1 B-R 2. In hemodynamically stable cardiac surgery patients with postoperative AF, rate-control (target  heart rate, <100 bpm) and/or rhythm-control medications are recommended as initial therapy, with  et al. Page 116 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

COR LOE Recommendations the choice of strategy according to patient symptoms, hemodynamic consequences of the arrhythmia,  and physician preference.5,6 1 B-R 3. In patients who develop poorly tolerated AF after cardiac surgery, direct current cardioversion  in combination with antiarrhythmic drug therapy is recommended, with consideration of imaging  to rule out left appendage thrombus before cardioversion in those patients in whom AF has been  present >48 hours and who have not been on anticoagulation.5,6 2a B-NR 4. In patients who develop postoperative AF after cardiac surgery, it is reasonable to administer  anticoagulation when deemed safe in regard to surgical bleeding for 60 days after surgery unless  complications develop and to reevaluate the need for longer term anticoagulation at that time.5,7 2a C-LD 5. In patients who develop AF after cardiac surgery and who are treated with rate-control strategy, at  30- to 60-day follow-up it is reasonable to perform rhythm assessment and, if AF does not revert to  sinus rhythm spontaneously, consider cardioversion after an adequate duration of anticoagulation.5,6 *A LOE applies to the data on beta blockers. †B-R LOE applies to the data on nondihydropyridine calcium channel blockers. Synopsis: For new-onset AF after cardiac surgery, rate control is typically managed with  beta blockers, or calcium channel blockers.1–4 A randomized trial showed no significant  clinical differences comparing a strategy of rate-control versus rhythm-control medications  for patients who are hemodynamically stable.5 For those with poorly controlled AF,  cardioversion is reasonable, but for those with >48 hours of AF, imaging of the LAA  (even if surgically closed) should be considered.5,6 The use of cardioversion and imaging  in postoperative patients is a judgment call considering the patient’s clinical condition. For  patients who develop postoperative AF, including during follow-up postdischarge, rhythm  assessment, and possible cardioversion for the small number who are still in AF, should be  considered.5,6 Colchicine had been shown to be effective, but more recent studies did not  confirm this, and gastrointestinal adverse effects may be significant.8–10 Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. The use of beta blockers to control heart rate is well documented.1–4 Calcium  channel blockers are an option for rate control when beta blockers are  ineffective.5 2. The use of rate control or rhythm control are both acceptable options in  hemodynamically stable patients because neither has a distinct clinical advantage  over the other based on a randomized study that included 529 patients. In this  study, patients in the rhythm-control group received amiodarone.5,6 3. Cardioversion of patients with sustained postoperative AF is regularly  performed, especially for those patients with hemodynamically poorly tolerated  AF. Cardioversion is routinely combined with pharmacological therapy,  especially amiodarone.5,6 4. A review of 8 observational studies that included 15 335 patients found  a protective impact on the mortality rate at 5 years but no differences  in thromboembolic events in patients with postoperative AF treated with  anticoagulants.7 In general, the duration of anticoagulation is a minimum of  60 days; in the randomized trial of rate control versus rhythm control, if  et al. Page 117 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

patients remained in AF or had recurrent AF 48 hours after randomization,  anticoagulation was recommended to be continued for 60 days, unless  complications occurred. Patients should be evaluated before discontinuation to  determine underlying rhythm, especially those at high risk for stroke. 5. The need for a rhythm-control strategy should be evaluated postdischarge.  Patients who tolerate rate control can be followed and often convert  spontaneously after 6 to 8 weeks. A net advantage of rate control is earlier  discharge in hemodynamically stable patients. Those who do not convert can be  managed accordingly with rhythm-control strategy.5,6 10.10. Acute Medical Illness or Surgery (Including AF in Critical Care) Recommendations for Acute Medical Illness or Surgery (Including AF in Critical Care) Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 B-NR 1. Patients with AF who are identified in the setting of acute medical illness or surgery should be  counseled about the significant risk of recurrent AF after the acute illness is resolved.1–6 2a B-NR 2. In patients with AF who are identified in the setting of acute medical illness or surgery,  outpatient follow-up for thromboembolic risk stratification and decision-making on OAC initiation  or continuation, as well as AF surveillance, can be beneficial given a high risk of AF recurrence.4–9 2b B-NR 3. In patients with AF who are identified in the setting of critical illness due to sepsis, the benefits of  anticoagulation during critical illness for stroke prevention are uncertain.10,11 Synopsis—AF identified in the setting of hospitalization for acute noncardiac illness  (acute AF), including patients who are critically ill, may represent new-onset AF that  has been detected and treated for the first time. Incidence ranges from 1% to 46% in  medical illness,1,12–14 with 6% to 22% in severe sepsis,15 and 3% to 16% after noncardiac  surgery.16 AF can be an incidental finding during low-risk procedures but can occur  associated with a range of conditions, including critical illness or sepsis. A combination of  underlying arrhythmogenic substrate and triggers related to the acute illness likely contribute  to acute AF. Acute AF can be paroxysmal or persistent, with or without symptoms,  and is associated with higher risk of AF recurrence.1–3 Acute AF is also associated  with prolonged hospitalization13,14 as well as increased morbidity12,15 and mortality.13,15  Management of acute AF is directed toward detection and treatment of potential triggers,  optimizing hemodynamics, rate and/or rhythm control, and reducing in-hospital and longterm risk of stroke. Rate- or rhythm-control strategy should be individualized, balancing  the impact of rapid rates and atrioventricular dyssynchrony on hemodynamics with ability  to tolerate treatment. Decisions regarding initiating anticoagulation should be based on  risk stratification of patient substrate and comorbidities, and the timing should take into  consideration bleeding risks and the complexity of the acute illness. Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. In patients who develop or are discovered to have AF in the setting of acute  medical illness and noncardiac surgery, recurrent AF was noted in 42% to 68%1,2  and 39%,3 respectively, during 5-year follow-up. Regardless of presence of an  et al. Page 118 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

initial precipitant, recurrent AF was associated with increased risks of HF (HR,  2.74 [95% CI, 2.39–3.15]; P<0.001), stroke (HR, 1.57 [95% CI, 1.30–1.90];  P<0.001), and mortality (HR, 2.96 [95% CI, 2.70–3.24]; P<0.001).2 2. In 10 723 patients with newly diagnosed AF (67.9±–9.9 years, 41% women)  identified from a longitudinal database, 19% of patients had an acute AF  precipitant, the most common being cardiac surgery (22%), pneumonia (20%),  and noncardiac surgery (15%). AF recurrence at 5 years was 41% among those  with a precipitant versus 52% in those without one (adjusted HR, 0.75 [95%  CI, 0.69–0.81]; P<0.001) (Figure 27).3 Regardless of a precipitant, recurrent  AF was associated with increased risk of HF (HR, 2.74 [95% CI, 2.39–3.15];  P<0.001), stroke (HR, 1.57 [95% CI, 1.30–1.90]; P<0.001), and death (HR,  2.96 [95% CI, 2.70–3.24]; P<0.001). In patients with acute AF after cardiac  surgery, observational studies show that those who underwent continuous rhythm  monitoring had a higher detection of AF.4–6 No randomized clinical trial has  specifically compared different monitoring strategies for outpatient follow-up of  patients with acute AF. However, parallels could be drawn from studies like  the CRYSTAL-AF8 and SEARCH-AF (Post-Surgical Enhanced Monitoring for  Cardiac Arrhythmias and Atrial Fibrillation)9 trials, which showed increased  sensitivity for AF detection with long-term monitoring. Close outpatient followup with consideration of heart rhythm monitoring and thromboembolic risk  stratification is important considering the high risk of AF recurrence in these  patients, especially in those who underwent noncardiac surgery and with risk  factors for stroke in whom the AF is likely to recur (Figure 28). The optimal  frequency, duration, and type of rhythm monitoring for patients with acute AF  remain unclear and need further study. 3. In a retrospective cohort study of 38 582 patients with AF and sepsis admitted  to US hospitals from July 1, 2010, to June 30, 2013, 13 611 patients (35.3%)  received parenteral anticoagulation for AF. The CHA2DS2-V ASc score was  a poor predictor of acute stroke risk, and parenteral anticoagulation did not  reduce stroke risk (1.3% versus 1.4%; RR, 0.94 [95% CI, 0.77–1.15]) and was  associated with an increased risk of clinically significant bleeding (8.6% versus  7.2%; RR, 1.21 [95% CI, 1.10–1.32]). Risk of stroke did not differ whether  patients had preexisting AF and new onset AF.10 In a retrospective cohort  study of 102 patients ≥65 years of age who were hospitalized with sepsis and  with new-onset AF, 28% received a prescription for OACs within 30 days of  admission. Over 3-year follow-up, no significant association was noted between  anticoagulation and a lower incidence of ischemic stroke (OR, 1.98 [95% CI,  0.29–13.47]) or bleeding (OR, 0.96 [95% CI, 0.29–3.21]).11 Gaps in knowledge  exist, and further research is needed to better understand the benefits and risks of  acute and long-term anticoagulation in critically ill patients with acute AF. et al. Page 119 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

10.11. Hyperthyroidism Recommendation for Hyperthyroidism Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendation 1 B-NR 1. In patients with hyperthyroidism and AF who have an elevated risk of stroke based on a standard  clinical risk score, anticoagulation is recommended until thyroid function has returned to normal and  sinus rhythm can be maintained.1,2 Synopsis—Hyperthyroidism, defined as elevated blood levels of thyroid hormone with  reduced levels of thyroid-stimulating hormone, is relatively common and may not lead to  overt symptoms of thyrotoxicosis.3,4 Patients with hyperthyroidism are at increased risk  of developing AF,5 which resolves in most cases after the restoration of the euthyroid  state with effective antithyroid treatment.6,7 Excess thyroid hormone increases sensitivity  to catecholamines,3,8 and beta blockers reduce symptoms and tachycardia in patients with  hyperthyroidism.9–12 Nonselective beta blockers may reduce the systemic symptoms of  hyperthyroidism a bit more than beta-1–selective agents do, and propranolol reduces the  peripheral conversion of T4 to T3.10,13 Although it is uncertain whether hyperthyroidism is  an independent risk factor for stroke, many patients have other risk factors that elevate stroke  risk, and anticoagulation reduces risk of stroke to a similar extent among patients with and  without hyperthyroidism.1,2,14 Restoration of sinus rhythm is unlikely until a euthyroid state  has been achieved15 and, in 1 study, spontaneous reversion to sinus rhythm occurred at a  median of 1 to 3 weeks after thyroid hormone levels returned to normal.6 Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. Patients with hyperthyroidism often have laboratory findings that suggest  hypercoagulability,16 but it is uncertain whether this translates into a higher  risk of stroke.1,17 Nevertheless, patients with hyperthyroidism are commonly at  elevated risk of stroke due to other clinical factors, so anticoagulation should be  considered using the framework in Section 6.3.1 (“Antithrombotic Therapy”). A  Danish national registry study found that patients with thyrotoxicosis and AF  had a lower overall risk of thromboembolic events but a similar reduction in the  risk of thromboembolic events from anticoagulation compared with patients who  did not have a secondary cause of AF.5 In a large, randomized trial of apixaban  versus warfarin, patients with a history of hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism  had risk of stroke similar to that of patients with no history of thyroid disease,  and the effectiveness of apixaban in reducing stroke was consistent across  subgroups with and without a history of thyroid disease.16 et al. Page 120 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

10.12. Pulmonary Disease Recommendations for Pulmonary Disease Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 2a B-R 1. In patients with AF and COPD, it is reasonable to use cardioselective beta blockers for rate control  of AF, especially where other indications exist (eg, MI and HF).1–3 2a B-NR 2. In patients with pulmonary hypertension (PH) with pulmonary vascular disease and AF or AFL, a  rhythm-control strategy is reasonable to improve functional status and potentially prolong survival.4– 12 Synopsis—Pulmonary disease is commonly associated with arrhythmias. AF is common  in COPD and is associated with an increased risk of mortality and bleeding.13 The  combination of AF and asthma is less common, and beta blockers are generally avoided  to prevent bronchospasm. A bidirectional relationship is seen between AF and pulmonary  embolus (PE), although it is little studied. The risk of PE is increased in patients with  AF.14 AF may also complicate acute PE, where it is a marker of increased risk of  mortality.15 Whether AF in the setting of PE should influence the intensity or duration  of anticoagulation, or is associated with future AF recurrence, is unknown. AF and other  supraventricular arrhythmias are important causes of decompensation in patients with PH,  which is especially well described in World Health Organization groups 1 and 4. A  successful rhythm-control strategy is associated with better outcomes in these patients. Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. AF is common in patients with COPD, with a prevalence of 11% in a  large European registry.16 Furthermore, patients with COPD often have other  concomitant heart disease. Because beta-2 agonists can be used for the treatment  of COPD, there has been a reluctance to prescribe beta blockers in case these  would antagonize beta-2 agonists or precipitate bronchospasm.17 However, a  systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies found that betablocker use, for diverse indications including HF and CAD, was associated  with a significantly reduced risk of mortality in patients with COPD.1 Another  meta-analysis of RCTs assessing the effect of cardioselective beta blockers on  respiratory function and symptoms did not find any change in these parameters  or in response to beta-2 agonists.2 An RCT of patients with advanced COPD at  risk of severe exacerbation, but without an indication for beta-blocker treatment,  found no difference in the time to first exacerbation but did find an increased  risk of severe exacerbation.3 Therefore, although other agents can be used  for rate control of AF (Section 7, “Rate Control”), beta blockers, especially  cardioselective beta blockers, for treatment of AF need not be avoided when  indicated, especially in patients with less than severe COPD. However, beta  blockers can exacerbate reactive airway disease and are generally avoided in that  setting, such as in patients with asthma. et al. Page 121 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

2. Atrial arrhythmias are common in PH with pulmonary vascular disease (PHPVD;  hemodynamically defined as PH with increased pulmonary vascular resistance  and normal left heart filling pressures, typical of World Health Organization  group 1 but also of groups 3 and 4). Right atrial contraction accounts for a  significantly greater proportion of total right heart function in patients with  PHPVD than in normal subjects,18 and the onset of atrial arrhythmia is frequently  associated with clinical deterioration.4–12 Restoration of sinus rhythm results  in improvement, whereas persistent arrhythmia or recurrence is associated with  mortality.4,8,9 Pharmacological rhythm control and cardioversion have both been  used, although negative inotropy may limit antiarrhythmic drug therapy. Catheter  ablation of typical AFL has been well described in patients with PHPVD,  with acceptable results and safety, as well as improvement in clinical and  hemodynamic parameters.5,7,12 LA ablation has also been described, although  the possibility of creating a right-to-left shunt should always be considered  when planning transseptal puncture. Anesthetic management is also complex,  and these patients are best cared for by centers with extensive clinical expertise  in these conditions. 10.13. Pregnancy Recommendations for Pregnancy Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 B-NR 1. In pregnant patients with AF, DCCV is safe to the patient and fetus and should be performed in  the same manner as in patients who are not pregnant.1 2b C-LD 2. In pregnant individuals with structurally normal hearts and hemodynamically stable AF,  pharmacological cardioversion with agents with history of safe use in pregnancy, such as intravenous  procainamide, may be considered.1,2 2a C-LD 3. In pregnant individuals with AF and without structural heart disease, antiarrhythmic agents with  history of safe use in pregnancy (eg, flecainide and sotalol) are reasonable for maintenance of sinus  rhythm.1,2 2a B-NR 4. In pregnant individuals with persistent AF, rate-control agents with a record of safety in  pregnancy, such as beta blockers (eg, propranolol or metoprolol) and digoxin, either alone or in  combination with beta blockers, are reasonable as first-line agents.1,2 2b C-LD 5. Pregnant individuals with AF and elevated risk of stroke may be considered for anticoagulation  with the recognition that no anticoagulation strategy is completely safe for both the mother and fetus,  and an SDM discussion should take place regarding risks to both mother and fetus (Table 28).3 Synopsis—The incidence of atrial arrhythmias is rising in pregnancy, and data from the  national inpatient sample suggest that this is largely driven by increasing incidence of AF,  with a reported frequency of 27 per 100 000 hospitalizations.4 The incidence of AF/AFL  in pregnant patients with heart disease is 1.3%, with a peak occurrence between 23 and 30  weeks gestation.5,6 Hospitalizations during pregnancy for arrhythmias are associated with an  increased risk of maternal and fetal adverse outcomes. AF during pregnancy is associated  with increased maternal mortality (OR, 13.13 [95% CI, 7.77–22.21]; P<0.0001).9 et al. Page 122 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Atrial arrhythmias may manifest for the first time during pregnancy; however, AF is  usually associated with underlying structural or CHD. Factors associated with an increased  incidence of AF in pregnant individuals include advanced maternal age,6 African American  race, lower socioeconomic status, and left-sided obstructive lesions.4,5 Obesity is associated  with the development of hypertensive disorders of pregnancy, which is also a known  risk factor for AF.7 Another potential mechanism for development of AF in pregnancy  is the cardiogastric interaction that occurs with elevated progesterone levels, leading to  gastroesophageal reflux disease.8 In patients deemed to be at high risk of stroke, recommendations for anticoagulation in  pregnancy are extrapolated from experience in managing VHD. DOACs are contraindicated  during pregnancy and during breastfeeding because of a lack of data to support their safety  and efficacy in this patient population. Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. Rapid atrioventricular conduction may have serious hemodynamic consequences  for both mother and fetus.9 DCCV of AF in pregnant individuals is safe for  both mother and fetus and should be performed within 48 hours of presentation  to minimize risk of stroke.1 Appropriate sedation should be provided to the  pregnant individuals before DCCV . Fetal monitoring is generally used during and  directly after DCCV . 2. Antiarrhythmic drugs are used in pregnancy for both maternal and fetal  conditions; therefore, their mechanisms and adverse effect profile must be  tolerable to both mother and fetus. These medications should be avoided if  possible during the first trimester, and initiation of the drug should be attempted  at the lowest dose with involvement of an electrophysiologist or cardiologist  skilled in the management of arrhythmias in pregnancy.10 Intravenous ibutilide  has been used effectively in pregnant women with refractory AF, although  published reports included a very small number of patients. In a pregnant patient  presenting with AF and manifest preexcitation, intravenous procainamide is also  an option.11 3. In pregnant individuals with structurally normal hearts and AF, rhythm-control  strategies may include agents with a long record of safety (eg, flecainide  and sotalol) with appropriate monitoring that includes surveillance ECGs.1,12  Amiodarone is generally avoided and reserved for life-threatening arrhythmias  because of potential toxicities to the fetus, including goiter, neurodevelopmental  abnormalities, bradycardia, delayed growth, and premature birth.10,12 4. In pregnant individuals with persistent AF, rate-control strategies may include  beta blockers with long record of safety in pregnancy (propranolol, metoprolol)  or digoxin. Atenolol is generally avoided in pregnancy due to concerns about  intrauterine growth retardation. Serum digoxin levels may be unreliable in  pregnancy as digoxin-like immunoreactive substances are increased in pregnant  individuals and react with antibodies against digoxin, interfering with the  radioassay used for detection of digoxin serum levels.13 et al. Page 123 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

5. Tools available to predict stroke risk in AF have not been validated in  pregnancy. In the rare case of AF with no risk factors or signs of heart  disease, anticoagulation may not be necessary.1,14 SDM should be used when  considering anticoagulation during pregnancy (Table 28). Some patients may  be deemed at high risk for stroke, such as those with mitral stenosis, for  which recommendations for anticoagulation in pregnancy are extrapolated from  experience in managing VHD. Warfarin may be administered in the first  trimester providing the dose needed to achieve a therapeutic INR is ≤5 mg.  If the dose of warfarin is >5 mg/day, low-molecular-weight heparin should be  administered throughout the first trimester and then transitioned to warfarin for  the remainder of the antenatal period until 36 hours before a planned delivery,  at which time unfractionated heparin is started.15 Vaginal delivery should be  advised for most women, and VKAs are generally held to mitigate risk of  bleeding compliciations.13 Use of novel DOACs is not recommended during  pregnancy in view of lack of evidence about safety.16 10.14. Cardio-Oncology and Anticoagulation Considerations Recommendations for Cardio-Oncology and Anticoagulation Considerations Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 1 C-LD 1. In patients with cancer and AF, multidisciplinary communication including cardiology, oncology  and other clinicians, and SDM with the patient is recommended to optimize cancer and AF treatment  and to reduce the risk of drug-drug interactions, QTc prolongation, proarrhythmia, bleeding, and  thromboembolism.1–3 2a C-LD 2. In patients who are to be initiated on cancer therapies associated with an increased risk  of developing AF, increased vigilance for incident AF and treatment of contributing factors is  reasonable to decrease morbidity.1,4–6 2a B-NR 3. In most patients with AF and cancer (remote history or receiving active cancer treatment), DOACs  are reasonable to choose over VKAs for stroke risk reduction.7,8 Synopsis—Patients with cancer have an increased risk of AF. A Danish nationwide  study observed an incident AF rate of 17.4 per 1000 person-years compared with 3.7 per  1000 person-years in patients without cancer.9 A meta-analysis of observational studies  demonstrated the risk of AF to be ~47% higher in patients with cancer compared with  patients without cancer.5,10 The increased risk of AF is likely related to increased age,  shared risk factors between cancer and CVD (eg, obesity and systemic inflammation),  coexistent comorbidities (eg, hypertension and HF), cardiac involvement by the tumor, as  well as certain medical therapeutics (Table 29), oncologic surgery, especially thoracic, and  thoracic radiation therapy.11,12 New-onset AF in patients with cancer is associated with  a higher risk of HF, thromboembolism, bleeding, and mortality.13–15 Notably, Bruton’s  tyrosine kinase (BTK) inhibitors, such as ibrutinib, which are used to treat chronic  lymphocytic leukemia and lymphoproliferative malignancies and often used for an extended  period of time, are associated with a higher risk of AF due to off-target cardiac effects.16 In  1 meta-analysis, the risk of AF with use of ibrutinib was 4 times higher compared with that  without use of ibrutinib.17 et al. Page 124 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Although patients with cancer are underrepresented in the major trials comparing DOACs  to VKAs, large observational studies and meta-analyses of studies of patients with cancer  and AF have demonstrated similar or lower rates of ischemic stroke and bleeding in patients  taking DOACs compared with warfarin.7,8 Patients with AF and cancer are at an increased  risk for major bleeding.18 They also are commonly on antineoplastic agents, which may  have important drug interactions with OACs.19 Thus, these factors should be carefully  considered in determining indication and choice of OAC. Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. In patients with cancer who develop AF in the presence of cancer therapeutics  associated with an increased risk of incident AF (Table 29), the first approach  usually consists of optimizing AF control while continuing cancer therapy.  However, if AF control cannot be achieved, decisions regarding dose reduction  of the cancer therapy or even stoppage can only be made in concert with  the oncology team and SDM with the patient. Drug-drug interactions between  cancer, antiarrhythmic, rate-control, and anticoagulant therapies are common and  require close attention.1 For example, in the case of BTK inhibitors, CYP3A  inhibitors such as amiodarone, dronedarone, verapamil, and diltiazem are usually  avoided, due to the associated risk of elevation in ibrutinib levels.1 Further,  ibrutinib can raise levels of digoxin, a P-glycoprotein substrate.1 Therefore,  beta blockers are considered the best option for rate control in BTK inhibitorassociated AF. If additional agents are needed for AF control, any concomitant  reduction in dose of ibrutinib is guided by oncology.1 Further, QTc prolongation,  which is more common in patients with cancer due to several cancer therapies,  antiemetics, antibiotics, and electrolyte derangements, can be further exacerbated  by QT-prolonging antiarrhythmic agents.3 Structured screening by pharmacists  for potential drug-drug interactions could provide benefit.2 2. Certain medical cancer therapies can increase the risk of incident AF (Table  29). Patients with cancer and AF are older and have higher rates of  hypertension, MI, and HF compared with those who do not develop AF.13– 15 The development of perioperative AF has been strongly associated with  perioperative complications.20 In general, patients with cancer and CVD may be  undertreated with GDMT or less often referred to specialists for cardiovascular  care.21 Optimization of cardiovascular conditions such as hypertension and HF  may decrease the risk of incident AF, AF recurrence, and of major adverse  cardiovascular events, including stroke.22–25 Therefore, in patients without a  history of AF, or those with previous history of AF, who are to be started on  cancer therapies associated with a higher risk of AF, evaluation and optimization  of cardiovascular risk factors or disease by a cardiologist could be beneficial  in decreasing incident and recurrent AF and associated cardiovascular events,  although no data are available specifically in patients with cancer. Furthermore,  elevated natriuretic peptides or a history of previous AF can identify patients at  higher risk of AF after major thoracic cancer surgery.26,27 et al. Page 125 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

3. No large RCTs are available that compare DOACs to warfarin in patients with  AF and cancer. A meta-analysis of post-hoc analyses of RCTs and retrospective  observational studies that compared DOACs with warfarin in patients with  AF and cancer (n=229 221) demonstrated a lower risk of stroke or systemic  embolism (RR, 0.65 [95% CI, 0.52–0.81]; P=0.001) and major bleeding (RR,  0.68 [95% CI, 0.50–0.92]; P=0.01) with DOACs.8 This meta-analysis included  post hoc analyses of patients with cancer and AF from the ROCKET AF  (rivaroxaban versus warfarin), ENGAGE TIMI-48 (edoxaban versus warfarin),  and ARISTOTLE (apixaban versus warfarin) trials. These findings were  consistent in patients defined as having active cancer, although definitions of  active cancer varied by study. An additional large retrospective observation study  comparing DOACs to warfarin in patients with active cancer demonstrated a  lower risk of the composite endpoint of ischemic stroke/intracranial bleeding  in patients taking DOACs compared with VKA (adjusted HR, 0.65 [95% CI,  0.48–0.88]).7 Although most of the data in this patient population came from  retrospective observational studies that may be prone to selection bias, findings  are largely consistent with post hoc analyses from RCTs and the major RCTs  comparing DOACs with VKA in general. Special consideration should be given  to patient bleeding risk and antineoplastic drug interactions in this patient  population (Table 30).18,19 10.15. CKD and Kidney Failure CKD and kidney failure (formerly end-stage renal disease) share common risk factors with  AF, such as hypertension and diabetes, and unsurprisingly, CKD and AF are associated  in a disproportionate manner. In population studies, baseline serum creatinine, eGFR,  and proteinuria were strongly associated with incident of AF during follow-up.1,2 AF at  baseline also predicted new renal dysfunction or proteinuria, suggesting a bidirectional  relationship between CKD and AF.2 In an insurance database of 206 229 adults with  confirmed CKD, over a mean follow-up of 5 years, there was a 67% increased rate of  kidney failure among patients with CKD who developed incident AF compared with those  without AF, even after adjustment for baseline factors.3 Data on the management of AF  in patients with CKD is limited because the major trials of rate control, rhythm control,  and catheter ablation have generally not reported eGFR or CKD as a baseline variable or  excluded such patients. Antiarrhythmic drug doses are adjusted based on pharmacokinetic  data and clinical experience, with amiodarone being the only drug that does not require  dose adjustment in patients with CKD or those receiving dialysis. Catheter ablation is  feasible, although particular attention must be paid to fluid balance when using irrigated  radiofrequency catheters. Anticoagulation in patients with CKD and AF is covered in  Section 6.8.4 (“Chronic Kidney Disease [CKD]/Kidney Failure”). et al. Page 126 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

10.16. Anticoagulation Use in Patients With Liver Disease Recommendations for Anticoagulation Use in Patients With Liver Disease Referenced studies that support the recommendations are summarized in the Online Data  Supplement. COR LOE Recommendations 2a B-NR 1. For patients with AF who are at increased risk of systemic thromboembolism and mild or  moderate liver disease (Child-Pugh* class A or B), OAC therapy is reasonable in the absence of  clinically significant liver disease–induced coagulopathy or thrombocytopenia.1–7 2a B-NR 2. For patients with AF who are at increased risk of systemic thromboembolism and mild or  moderate liver disease (Child-Pugh class A or B) and who are deemed to be candidates for  anticoagulation, it is reasonable to prescribe DOACs (Child-Pugh class A: any DOAC; ChildPugh class B: apixaban, dabigatran, or edoxaban) over warfarin.1,7–11 3: Harm C-LD 3. For patients with AF and moderate liver disease (Child-Pugh class B) at increased risk of  systemic thromboembolism, rivaroxaban is contraindicated due to the potentially increased risk  of bleeding.12 *Child-Pugh scoring: the severity of liver disease, primarily cirrhosis in patients with diagnosed liver disease. Child-Pugh A  (mild): 5–6 points; Child-Pugh B (moderate): 7–9 points; Child-Pugh C (severe): 10–15 points. The score is based on the 5  variables: encephalopathy (none=1 point, grade 1 and 2=2 points, grade 3 and 4=3 points); ascites (none=1 point, slight=2  points, moderate=3 points); total bilirubin (<2 mg/mL=1 point, 2–3 mg/mL=2 points, >3 mg/mL=3 points); albumin (>3.5  mg/mL=1 point, 2.8–3.5 mg/mL=2 points, <2.8 mg/mL=3 points); INR (<1.7=1 point, INR 1.7–2.2=2 points, INR >2.2=3  points). Synopsis—No RCT has evaluated the use of OACs in patients with AF and liver disease.  Three observational studies and 1 meta-analysis of observational studies have compared  OAC therapy with no OAC therapy in patients with AF and active liver disease or a history  of liver disease.1–4 In addition, 3 observational studies have compared OAC therapy in  patients with liver disease to those without liver disease.5–7 In general, anticoagulation  has been associated with lower risks of ischemic stroke or thromboembolism but was  also associated with a significantly higher risk of major bleeding or ICH compared with  no oral anticoagulation therapy in patients with AF and liver disease. Oral factor Xa  inhibitors undergo hepatic metabolism, and impaired liver function may increase their  plasma concentrations and the risk of bleeding. Pivotal clinical trials for DOACs excluded  patients with active liver disease. Four postmarketing retrospective studies and 2 metaanalyses have evaluated the comparison between DOACs and VKAs in this population, and  they showed DOACs were associated with a lower risk of major bleeding or ICH.1,7–11  Limited data exist on the safety of DOAC in severe liver disease. The uses of DOACs based  on a Child-Pugh Score are summarized in Table 13 (Section 6.3.1.1. “Considerations in  Managing Anticoagulation”). Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text 1. A meta-analysis showed that VKA use was significantly associated with lower  risks of ischemic stroke or thromboembolism but was also associated with  significantly higher risks of major bleeding or ICH in patients with AF and  liver disease compared with no oral anticoagulation therapy.7 A large-scale  retrospective study also corroborated that OAC use was significantly associated  with a lower risk of stroke or all-cause mortality in patients with AF and  cirrhosis.3 VKA use in the liver fibrosis group was associated with a higher  risk of the composite cardiovascular events and major bleeding than in the  et al. Page 127 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

nonliver fibrosis group.4 However, no significant difference in the composite  cardiovascular events and major bleeding between the 2 groups receiving  DOACs was found. The efficacy and safety of VKAs or DOACs were not  affected by nonalcohol fatty liver disease status.5 The subgroup analysis of the  meta-analysis found that the risk of major bleeding was not affected by the  presence of esophageal varices.13 2. A meta-analysis found no significant difference in the risk of ischemic stroke and  thromboembolism between DOACs and VKAs (OR, 0.82 [95% CI, 0.361.88];  P=0.64) in patients with almost exclusively mildto-moderate liver disease (ChildPugh class A-B), but DOAC use was associated with lower risks of major  bleeding (OR, 0.54 [95% CI, 0.38–0.75]; P=0.0003) and ICH (OR, 0.35 [95%  CI, 0.23–0.53]; P<0.0001) compared with the warfarin group.7 Another metaanalysis showed that, in patients with exclusively mild-to-moderate cirrhosis  (Child-Pugh score A-B), DOAC use was associated with lower risks of ischemic  stroke (HR, 0.62 [95% CI, 0.10–0.90]), major bleeding (HR, 0.64 [95% CI,  0.57–0.72]), or ICH (HR, 0.49 [95% CI, 0.40–0.59]) compared with warfarin.11  DOACs are reasonable oral anticoagulation agents in patients with AF and mildto-moderate liver disease (Child-Pugh class A-B). However, data on DOACs are  lacking on patients with AF and severe liver disease (Child-Pugh class C). 3. Rivaroxaban is currently avoided in patients with moderate liver disease (ChildPugh class B). Rivaroxaban AUC significantly increased by 2.27-fold after  a single dose of rivaroxaban 10 mg in patients with moderate liver disease  compared with healthy subjects.12 Although the FDA labeling recommends  avoiding edoxaban in patients with moderate liver disease due to the concern  of underlying coagulopathy, the edoxaban AUC was not significantly increased  after a single dose of edoxaban 15 mg in patients with moderate liver  disease compared with healthy subjects.14 Apixaban AUC was not significantly  increased after a single dose of apixaban 5 mg in subjects with mild and  moderate liver disease (Child-Pugh class A and B) compared with healthy  subjects.15 Dabigatran AUC was also not significantly different after a single  dose of dabigatran 150 mg in patients with moderate liver disease (Child-Pugh  class B) compared with that in healthy subjects.16 11. FUTURE RESEARCH NEEDS Enormous progress and important advances have been made in recent years on the  understanding of mechanisms and on the prevention and management of AF, including  substantial progress since the 2014 guideline, as well as the 2019 focused update. Although  the writing committee has tried to make significant progress in this current guideline to  address many of the gaps in the clinical management of AF, important gaps in knowledge  remain and are listed below. 1. AF as a disease continuum: AF must be seen as a disease continuum, yet  historically the emphasis has been on rhythm management. More evidence is  needed on how to best improve in other aspects of AF care, such as prevention,  et al. Page 128 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

modification of risk factors, and how to incorporate holistic approaches to AF  management into daily clinical practice. 2. Downstream consequences: The downstream consequences of AF over the long  term must be better studied and defined. Most studies generally focus on shortterm effects of therapy, usually 6 to 12 months. Many long-term consequences of  AF remain poorly characterized, such as dementia and valvular insufficiency. 3. Better goal and outcome definition: Historically, ablation failure has been  defined as having 30 seconds of AF identified during a follow-up period.  However, that number might be too simplistic because AF burden may be  a more important metric and because the 30-second metric might not reflect  significant burden reduction that may be observed in many patients. Patientoriented outcomes would also be more important, such as QOL. 4. Role of risk modifiers in AF stroke prevention: Great variation exists in risk  of stroke depending on nonbinary or dynamic risk factors. Yet it is unclear how  to best manage patients accordingly. For example, how should risk of stroke be  assessed in a person with hypertension in whom the BP is very well controlled?  Or, perhaps, how do we incorporate AF burden on the risk calculation? 5. Individualization of AF and stroke risk: Although some studies have  demonstrated an effective role of biomarkers in predicting AF and stroke, how to  incorporate these findings into clinical practice remains elusive. Similarly, how  to incorporate other clinical markers of atrial cardiopathy into clinical practice  must be better defined, as well as clarification as to how these nontraditional risk  factors help better stratify patient risk. 6. Incorporating other stroke risk scores: The ubiquitous nature and simplicity  of the CHA2DS2-V ASc score have diminished with consideration of other  scores of potential utility, better c-statistics, and with potential advantages in  particular populations. Additional studies are needed to better take advantage of  scores for specific groups, scores that could potentially be incorporated into the  electronic medical record, and perhaps some with the potential benefit of better  discriminating the true low-risk patients. 7. Surgical exclusion and LAAO: Increasingly available evidence has  demonstrated the benefit of surgical LAA exclusion for stroke prevention, but  the most scientifically rigorous trials included patients who received concomitant  anticoagulation. More evidence is needed on the magnitude of benefit of  LAA exclusion in preventing stroke in patients who have contraindications to  anticoagulation and how to best manage those patients around rhythm-control  interventions, such as cardioversion. Clinicians would also like to see additional  data on pLAAO, particularly peri-implant stroke management and longer-term  outcomes in patients in whom periprocedure anticoagulation is not possible. 8. Subclinical AF: What magnitude of AF burden mandates stroke prevention  therapy in patients with subclinical AF must be better defined. Certainly, large  general risk categories have been identified, and general guidelines exist, but  et al. Page 129 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

extensive practice variations remain, and more precise recommendations for the  community are needed. In addition, the role and impact on outcomes of AF  screening in general and poststroke should be better defined. 9. Use and applicability of consumer-based wearable heart monitoring devices:  These devices are now widespread and are used to diagnose and monitor  response to therapy in patients with AF. Validation on the accuracy of the most  common available technologies is needed. How to best use these devices in  practice, including for AF screening, must be better defined. 10. Standardization of ablation procedures: Great practice variation exists on how  AF ablation procedures are performed, either as first or repeat procedures. Large  registries and more data are required to better define standards of care in this  field. Many interventions, such as extra ablation lines, are still performed despite  limited data demonstrating efficacy, whereas the best approaches to persistent AF  and repeat ablation are poorly defined. 11. Candidates for ablation: We must better identify clinical markers to better  identify when catheter ablation is unlikely to benefit patients and define specific  criteria for candidacy for first time and repeat procedures. 12. Artificial intelligence for AF management: Artificial intelligence could  potentially be used to better tailor therapy to the individual patient, taking into  consideration numerous factors that may better select candidates for therapeutic  approaches, such as anticoagulation versus LAAO, rhythm versus rate control,  catheter ablation versus medical therapy, modification of risk factors, genetics,  and others. 13. Strategies for anticoagulation: Ongoing clinical trials are assessing different  strategies for oral anticoagulation in persons who have undergone catheter  ablation, including the OCEAN (Optimal AntiCoagulation for Enhanced-Risk  Patients Post-Catheter Ablation for Atrial Fibrillation) trial (NCT02168829)1  and ODIn-AF (Prevention of Silent Cerebral Thromboembolism by Oral  Anticoagulation With Dabigatran After Pulmonary Vein Isolation for  Atrial Fibrillation) (NCT02067182)2 trial, because it is unclear in whom  anticoagulation can be discontinued after successful ablation. Several studies  also have investigated the use of intermittent or continuous rhythm monitoring  to guide oral anticoagulation in persons with AF, including those who have  undergone ablation.3,4 These so-called “PITP” or “electrocardiographic-guided”  approaches are investigational. Ongoing clinical trials like REACT-AF (Rhythm  Evaluation for Anticoagulation Therapy for Atrial Fibrillation) will help  determine whether they are suitable for clinical practice. Also, anticoagulation/ DOAC use in pregnancy needs to be investigated because it is currently  contraindicated in view of lack of data on safety. 14. Sleep: Among patients with AF and SDB, the impact of treatment of SDB on  maintenance of sinus rhythm and on general cardiovascular outcomes remains  et al. Page 130 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

uncertain. Most studies have been observational, which introduces confounding  factors. Once diagnosed, the adherence to treatment for SDB is also suboptimal. 15. SDM and decision aids: Decision aids are perceived as important tools to better  inform patients about options for AF management; yet, it is unclear if those  tools improve clinical outcomes. Most decision aids developed for AF focus on  anticoagulation; there is a paucity of validated decision aids, including for AF  rhythm management using antiarrhythmic drugs or ablation. 16. Genetic testing: The use and applicability of consumer-based or targeted genetic  testing for AF remains uncertain. Polygenic risk scores can indicate higher  risk for AF, but the use of genetic testing to impact clinical surveillance,  management, and clinical outcomes remains uncertain. 17. Race, ethnicity, gender, and sex differences: In sexual- and gender-diverse  individuals, additional research is recommended to identify the incidence and  outcomes of AF as well as the impact of gender-affirming therapies on  arrhythmia incidence and outcomes. Additional data across racial and ethnic  groups should also be encouraged. 18. Standardized measures: For patients with AF, a standardized measure might be  useful to assess symptoms and/or QOL and impact of management strategies. 19. SDOH: The measurement and impact of SDOH in AF is underutilized and  understudied. Supplementary Material Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material. Appendix 1.: Author Relationships With Industry and Other Entities—2023  ACC/AHA/ACCP/HRS Guideline for the Diagnosis and Management of Atrial  Fibrillation Committee  Member Employment Consultant Speakers  Bureau Ownership/ Partnership/ Principal Personal  Research Institutional,  Organizational,  or Other  Financial  Benefit Expert  Witness José A. Joglar,  Chair UT Southwestern  Medical Center–  Professor and Vice  Chair for Clinical  Affairs at Parkland,  Department of  Internal Medicine  Elizabeth Thaxton  and Ellis Batten  Page Professorship  in Cardiac  Electrophysiology  Research Director  of Cardiac  Electrophysiology  None None None None None None et al. Page 131 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Committee  Member Employment Consultant Speakers  Bureau Ownership/ Partnership/ Principal Personal  Research Institutional,  Organizational,  or Other  Financial  Benefit Expert  Witness Fellowship  Program Mina K.  Chung, Vice  Chair Cleveland Clinic,  Cleveland Clinic  Lerner College of  Medicine of Case  Western Reserve  University–Cardiac  Pacing and  Electrophysiology  Department of  Cardiovascular  Medicine, Heart  and Vascular  Institute  Department of  Cardiovascular &  Metabolic  Sciences, Lerner  Research Institute NOT  RELEV ANT • ABIM* • Geisinger  Health Systems None None NOT  RELEV ANT • AHA* • NIH* NOT  RELEV ANT • Abbott‡ • AHA* • Biosense  Webster‡ • Boston  Scientific‡ • Elsevier • FNRA • Hamilton  Health Sciences/ PHRI‡ • HRS† • Medtronic‡ • Myocardial  Solutions‡ • UptoDate None Anastasia L.  Armbruster St. Louis College  of Pharmacy AT  UHSP–Associate  Professor,  Pharmacy Practice None RELEV ANT •  AstraZeneca None None None None Emelia J.  Benjamin Boston University  Schools of  Medicine and  Public Health, The  Framingham Heart  Study–Associate  Provost for Faculty  Development,  Boston University  Medical Campus  Vice Chair, Faculty  Development and  Diversity,  Department of  Medicine  Cardiologist,  Boston Medical  Center, Boston  University Medical  Group None None None NOT  RELEV ANT • AHA* • Cardia  (DSMB)† • NIH* NOT  RELEV ANT • Circulation† • European Heart  Journal† • Nature Reviews  Cardiology† None Janice Y .  Chyou Icahn School of  Medicine at Mount  Sinai–Assistant  Clinical Professor,  Cardiac  Electrophysiology,  Cardiology Heart  and Heart Rhythm  Care None None None None NOT  RELEV ANT • AHA† • HRS† • McGraw Hill None Edmond M.  Cronin Temple University  Hospital–Main  Campus–Temple  Heart & Vascular  Institute RELEV ANT • Medtronic None None None NOT  RELEV ANT • Biosense  Webster§ • Janssen  Pharmaceuticals§ • Medtronic§ None Anita Deswal The University of  Texas MD  Anderson Cancer  Center–Chair,  None None None None NOT  RELEV ANT • ACC* None et al. Page 132 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Committee  Member Employment Consultant Speakers  Bureau Ownership/ Partnership/ Principal Personal  Research Institutional,  Organizational,  or Other  Financial  Benefit Expert  Witness Department of  Cardiology Ting Tsung and  Wei Fong Chao  Distinguished  Chair Professor of  Medicine • CPRIT* • NIH Lee Eckhardt University of  WisconsinMadison– Associate  Professor of  Medicine Gary and Marie  Weiner Professor  in Cardiovascular Medicine Research  Cellular and  Molecular  Arrhythmia  Research Program Division of  Cardiovascular  Medicine None None None None None None Zachary D.  Goldberger University of  WisconsinMadison School of  Medicine and  Public Health Division of  Cardiovascular  Medicine/ Electrophysiology– Associate  Professor of  Medicine Program  Director,  Cardiovascular  Disease Fellowship Associate Program  Director, Clinical  Cardiac  Electrophysiology  Fellowship None None None None None None Rakesh  Gopinathannair University of  Louisville– Associate  Professor of  Medicine  (Adjunct) University of  MissouriColumbia–Cardiac  EP Lab Director, Kansas  City Heart Rhythm  Institute EP Medical  Director, Research  Medical Center  Professor of  Medicine RELEV ANT • Abbott* • Biosense  Webster • Biotronik • Boston  Scientific* • Johnson &  Johnson • Pfizer* • Sanofi-Aventis • Zoll† NOT  RELEV ANT • Academy for  Continued  Healthcare  Learning RELEV ANT • Pfizer† • Zoll† None None NOT  RELEV ANT • AHA • Atricure • Geisinger  Health System • HRS • Janssen  Pharmaceuticals • Kowa  Pharmaceuticals • Medtronic • Methodist  Health System • Novartis • Pacemate† • Philips None Bulent  Gorenek Eskisehir  Osmangazi  University School  RELEV ANT • AstraZeneca • Bayer None None None None None et al. Page 133 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Committee  Member Employment Consultant Speakers  Bureau Ownership/ Partnership/ Principal Personal  Research Institutional,  Organizational,  or Other  Financial  Benefit Expert  Witness of Medicine– Cardiovascular  Diseases,  Arrhythmias in  Intensive Cardiac  Care Unit.  Professor in  Cardiology Vice  Director,  Cardiology  Department • Daiichi Sankyo • Roche NOT  RELEV ANT • Sandoz Paul L. Hess University of  Colorado School  of Medicine Seattle-Denver  Center of  Innovation Rocky Mountain  Regional V A  Medical Center– Associate  Professor of  Medicine None None None None NOT  RELEV ANT • CPC Clinical  Research* • V A CSP None Mark Hlatky Stanford  University School  of Medicine– Professor of Health  Policy, and of  Medicine  (Cardiovascular  Medicine), and, by  courtesy, of  Epidemiology and  Population Health RELEV ANT • Boehringer  Ingelheim NOT  RELEV ANT • BCBS Center  for Effectiveness  Evaluation* None None None NOT  RELEV ANT • George Institute None Gail Hogan Patient  Representative None None None None NOT  RELEV ANT • Ohio State  University  Wexner Medical  Center None Chinwe Ibeh Columbia  University  CUIMC/ Neurological  Institute of New  York–Assistant  Professor of  Neurology Department of  Neurology  Division of Stroke  and  Cerebrovascular  Disease None None None None None None Julia H. Indik University of  Arizona College of  Medicine– Professor of  Medicine Director,  Cardiovascular  Disease Fellowship  Program Division  of Cardiology/ None None None None None None et al. Page 134 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Committee  Member Employment Consultant Speakers  Bureau Ownership/ Partnership/ Principal Personal  Research Institutional,  Organizational,  or Other  Financial  Benefit Expert  Witness Sarver Heart  Center Kazuhiko Kido West Virginia  University– Cardiology  Pharmacy  Specialist,  Advanced Heart  Failure and  Pulmonary  Hypertension  Clinical Assistant  Professor of  Clinical Pharmacy None None None None None None Fred  Kusumoto Mayo Clinic  Jacksonville None None None NOT  RELEV ANT • EP  Research  Foundation  (TAP-CHF  Trial) NOT  RELEV ANT • Biotronik§ None Mark S. Link UT Southwestern  Medical Center,  Dallas–Professor  of Medicine.  Director, Cardiac  Electrophysiology.  Laurence and  Susan Hirsch/ Centex  Distinguished  Chair in Heart  Disease Department of  Internal Medicine,  Division of  Cardiology None None None None NOT  RELEV ANT • Circulation* • Journal Watch  Cardiology • UpToDate* None Kathleen T.  Linta Patient  Representative None None None None None None Gregory M.  Marcus University of  California, San  Francisco– Professor of  Medicine in  Residence Associate Chief of  Cardiology for  Research Endowed Professor  of Atrial  Fibrillation  Research NOT  RELEV ANT • InCarda* RELEV ANT • Johnson &  Johnson None None NOT  RELEV ANT • Baylis* NOT  RELEV ANT • InCarda* None Patrick M.  McCarthy Northwestern  Medicine– Executive Director,  Bluhm  Cardiovascular  Institute Vice President,  Northwestern  Medical Group Chief, Division of  Cardiac Surgery Heller-Sacks  RELEV ANT • Abbott • Atricure • Edwards  Lifesciences* • Medtronic None None RELEV ANT • Abbott† NOT  RELEV ANT • Egnite • Siemens RELEV ANT • Edwards  Lifesciences* None et al. Page 135 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Committee  Member Employment Consultant Speakers  Bureau Ownership/ Partnership/ Principal Personal  Research Institutional,  Organizational,  or Other  Financial  Benefit Expert  Witness Professor of  Surgery Nimesh Patel UT Southwestern  Medical Center–  Assistant Professor  of Medicine,  Clinical Cardiac  Electrophysiology None None None None NOT  RELEV ANT • Abbvie§ • Novo Nordisk§ None Kristen K.  Patton University of  Washington– Professor of  Medicine None None None None NOT  RELEV ANT • ACGME† • AHA† • HRS† • JAMA • US FDA  CDRH* None Marco V . Perez Stanford  University– Associate  ProfessorUniversity Med  Line Department  of Medicine, Med/ Cardiovascular RELEV ANT • Biotronik* • Boehringer  Ingelheim* • Boston  Scientific* • Bristol Myers  Squibb • Johnson &  Johnson None NOT  RELEV ANT • Feather  Health* NOT  RELEV ANT • Apple* • NIH* None NOT  RELEV ANT Defendant,  Digital  health tools  case, 2021 Jonathan P.  Piccini Duke University  School of  Medicine–  Department of  Medicine RELEV ANT • Abbott* • Abbvie • ARCA  Biopharma • Biotronik • Bristol Myers  Squibb* •  Electrophysiology  Frontiers* • Itamar Medical • Medtronic* • Milestone  Medical • Philips* • Recor • Sanofi-Aventis* NOT  RELEV ANT • UpToDate* None None RELEV ANT • Abbott* • Bayer* • Boston  Scientific* • iRhythm* • Philips* NOT  RELEV ANT • AAMI* • Acutus  Medical,  Inc.§ • AHA* • Atricure§ • Element  Science  (DSMB)* • LivaNova  (CEAC)* • LSI  Solutions§ NOT  RELEV ANT • LivaNova  (CEAC)* None Andrea M.  Russo Cooper  University– Professor of  Medicine Director,  Electrophysiology  and Arrhythmia  Services Director of  Research, Cooper  Heart Institute Program Director,  Clinical Cardiac  Electrophysiology  Fellowship RELEV ANT • Abbott • Atricure • Biosense  Webster • Biotonik • Boston  Scientific • Bristol Myers  Squibb • Medtronic • Pfizer • Sanofi NOT  RELEV ANT • Medical Device  None None None NOT  RELEV ANT • ABIM • Boston  Scientific‡ • Kestra‡ • MediLynx‡ • UpToDate None et al. Page 136 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Committee  Member Employment Consultant Speakers  Bureau Ownership/ Partnership/ Principal Personal  Research Institutional,  Organizational,  or Other  Financial  Benefit Expert  Witness Business  Services, Inc. • Pacemate Prashanthan  Sanders The University of  Adelaide Royal  Adelaide Hospital– Director, Centre  for Heart Rhythm  Disorders Director, Cardiac  Electrophysiology  & Pacing NHMRC  Practitioner Fellow None None None RELEV ANT • Abbott* • BD* •  Boston  Scientific* •  Medtronic* RELEV ANT • Abbott • Boston  Scientific • CathRX • Medtronic NOT  RELEV ANT • Pacemate None Megan M.  Streur University of  Washington– Assistant Professor  and Endowed  Faculty Fellow for  Cardiovascular  Disease Prevention Department of  Biobehavioral  Nursing and  Health Informatics Adjunct Assistant  Professor, Cardiac  Electrophysiology  Department of  Medicine None None None NOT  RELEV ANT • NIH/ NINR* None None Kevin L.  Thomas Duke University  School of  Medicine–  Professor of  Medicine Vice Dean for  Diversity, Equity  and Inclusion Member in the  Duke Clinical  Research Institute RELEV ANT • Biosense  Webster • Johnson &  Johnson None None None NOT  RELEV ANT • Community  Health  Coalition† None Sabrina  Times§ American Heart  Association/ American College  of Cardiology  Science and Health  Advisor,  Guidelines None None None None None None James E.  Tisdale Purdue University  College of  Pharmacy– Professor Indiana  University School  of Medicine– Adjunct Professor None None None NOT  RELEV ANT • AHRQ* • AHA* • NIH* NOT  RELEV ANT • American  Society for  Health-Systems  Pharmacists • AZCert† •  Crediblemeds.  org† • Nova  Southeastern  University •  Pharmacotherapy  Journal •  Pharmacotherapy  None et al. Page 137 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Committee  Member Employment Consultant Speakers  Bureau Ownership/ Partnership/ Principal Personal  Research Institutional,  Organizational,  or Other  Financial  Benefit Expert  Witness Publications, Inc. † Anne Marie  Valente Boston Children’s  Hospital, Brigham  and Women’s  Hospital–CoDirector,  Pregnancy and  Cardiovascular  Disease Program  Brigham and  Women’s Hospital Associate  Professor,  Medicine and  Pediatrics Harvard Medical  School Section  Chief, Boston  Adult Congenital  Heart Disease  (BACH) and  Pulmonary  Hypertension  Program NOT  RELEV ANT • Elsevier* None None None NOT  RELEV ANT • Elsevier* • Journal of the  ACC* • United  Therapeutics§ None David R. Van  Wagoner Cleveland Clinic,  ND-50– Department of  Cardiovascular &  Metabolic Sciences None None None NOT  RELEV ANT • AHA* • NIH/ NHLBI* None None This table represents all relationships of committee members with industry and other entities that were reported by authors,  including those not deemed to be relevant to this document, at the time this document was under development. The table  does not necessarily reflect relationships with industry at the time of publication. A person is deemed to have a significant  interest in a business if the interest represents ownership of ≥5% of the voting stock or share of the business entity, or  ownership of ≥$5000 of the fair market value of the business entity; or if funds received by the person from the business  entity exceed 5% of the person’s gross income for the previous year. Relationships that exist with no financial benefit are  also included for the purpose of transparency. Relationships in this table are modest unless otherwise noted. Please refer to  https://www.acc.org/guidelines/about-guidelines-and-clinical-documents/relationships-with-industry-policy for definitions  of disclosure categories or additional information about the ACC/AHA Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees. *Significant relationship. †No financial benefit. ‡This disclosure was entered under the Clinical Trial Enroller category in the ACC’s disclosure system. To appear in this  category, the author acknowledges that there is no direct or institutional relationship with the trial sponsor as defined in the  (ACCF or AHA/ACC) Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees. §Sabrina Times is an AHA/ACC joint staff member and acts as the Science and Health Advisor for the “2023 ACC/AHA/ ACCP/HRS Guideline for the Diagnosis and Management of Atrial Fibrillation.” No relevant relationships to report.  Nonvoting author on measures and not included/counted in the RWI balance for this writing committee. AAMI indicates Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation; ABIM, American Board of Internal  Medicine; ACC, American College of Cardiology; ACGME, Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education;  AHA, American Heart Association; AHRQ, Agency for Health Research and Quality; BCBS, Blue Cross Blue Shield; BD,  Becton Dickinson; CDRH, Center for Devices and Radiological Health; CEAC, Clinical Event Adjudication Committee;  CPRIT, Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas; CUIMC, Columbia University Imng Medical Center; DSMB,  data and safety monitoring board; EP, electrophysiology; FDA, US Food and Drug Administration; FNRA, French National  Research Agency; HRS, Heart Rhythm Society; JAMA, Journal of the American Medical Association; NIH, National  Institutes of Health; NINR, National Institute of Nursing Research; NHLBI, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute;  NHMRC, National Health and Medical Research Council; PHRI, Population Health Research Institute; UHSP, University  of Health Science and Pharmacy in St. Louis; UT, University of Texas; and V A CSP, Veterans Affairs Cooperative Studies  Program. et al. Page 138 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Appendix 2.: Reviewer Relationships With Industry and Other Entities  (Comprehensive)—2023 ACC/AHA/ACCP/HRS Guideline for the Diagnosis  and Management of Atrial Fibrillation Reviewer Representation Employment Consultant Speakers  Bureau Ownership/ Partnership/ Principal Personal  Research Institutional,  Organizational,  or Other  Financial  Benefit Expert  Witness Andrew D.  Krahn AHA/ACC  Atrial  Fibrillation  Peer Review  Committee  Chair University of  British  Columbia None None • CCS* • HRS* None None None Jason G.  Andrade AHA/ACC  Atrial  Fibrillation  Peer Review  Committee University of  Montreal • Biosense  Webster • Medtronic • Bayer • Bristol  Myers  Squibb/ Pfizer  Alliance • Servier None •  Medtronic† None None Craig J.  Beavers AHA/ACC  Atrial  Fibrillation  Peer Review  Committee,  representing  ACCP University of  Kentucky  College of  Pharmacy None None None None None None James M.  Bischoff AHA/ACC  Atrial  Fibrillation  Peer Review  Committee,  Patient  Representative Superintendent,  Retired None None None None None None T. Jared  Bunch AHA/ACC  Atrial  Fibrillation  Peer Review  Committee,  representing  HRS University of  Utah School of  Medicine None None None • Altathera† •  Boehringer  Ingelheim† • Abbott‡ • Altathera‡ • Cardiva‡ • St. Jude’s  Medical‡ None Kristen  Bova  Campbell AHA/ACC  Atrial  Fibrillation  Peer Review  Committee Duke  University • Wolters  Kluwer None None None None None Lin Yee  Chen AHA/ACC  Atrial  Fibrillation  Peer Review  Committee University of  Minnesota  School of  Medicine None None None None • NIH† None Robin  Dharia AHA/ACC  Atrial  Fibrillation  Peer Review  Committee Thomas  Jefferson  University None None None None • NIH‡ None Michael P.  Dorsch AHA/ACC  Atrial  Fibrillation  Peer Review  Committee,  University of  Michigan None None None None None None et al. Page 139 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Reviewer Representation Employment Consultant Speakers  Bureau Ownership/ Partnership/ Principal Personal  Research Institutional,  Organizational,  or Other  Financial  Benefit Expert  Witness representing  JCPM Edward P.  Gerstenfeld AHA/ACC  Atrial  Fibrillation  Peer Review  Committee University of  California San  Francisco • Biosense  Webster† • Medtronic • St. Jude  Medical None None • Abbott  (DSMB)† • Adagio* • Boston  Scientific* •  Thermedical  (DSMB)† • Boston  Scientific* None Aubrey E.  Jones AHA/ACC  Atrial  Fibrillation  Peer Review  Committee University of  Utah College  of Pharmacy None None None • AHRQ† • NIHNHLBI† None None Stephanie  Dwyer  Kaluzna AHA/ACC  Atrial  Fibrillation  Peer Review  Committee University of  Illinois  Chicago  College of  Pharmacy None None None None None None Luke  Masha AHA/ACC  Atrial  Fibrillation  Peer Review  Committee Oregon Health  & Science  University None None None None • Ancora‡ • Endotronix‡ None Isabelle  Nault AHA/ACC  Atrial  Fibrillation  Peer Review  Committee Quebec Heart  and Lung  Institute • Bristol Myers  Squibb • Pfizer • Bayer† •  Biosense  Webster •  Medtronic • Servier† None None None None Peter A.  Noseworthy AHA/ACC  Atrial  Fibrillation  Peer Review  Committee Mayo Clinic None None None None • Anumana* • Milestone‡ None Cara N.  Pellegrini AHA/ACC  Atrial  Fibrillation  Peer Review  Committee University of  California San  Francisco • Abbott • Biosense  Webster • Cook Medical • Medtronic None None None None None Stylianos E.  Tzeis AHA/ACC  Atrial  Fibrillation  Peer Review  Committee Mitera Hospital • Pfizer None None None • Bayer‡ None Annabelle  Santos  V olgman AHA/ACC  Atrial  Fibrillation  Peer Review  Committee Rush  University  Medical Center • Bristol Myers  Squibb  Foundation  DCICDP • Janssen  Pharmaceuticals • Merck • Pfizer • Sanofi  Aventis† None None • NIH† • Apple* • Novartis‡ None Emily P.  Zeitler AHA/ACC  Atrial  Fibrillation  Dartmouth  Hitchock  Medical Center • Abbott • Biosense  Webster • Medtronic None None • Boston  Scientific† • Sanofi  Aventis* None None et al. Page 140 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Reviewer Representation Employment Consultant Speakers  Bureau Ownership/ Partnership/ Principal Personal  Research Institutional,  Organizational,  or Other  Financial  Benefit Expert  Witness Peer Review  Committee This table represents all reviewers’ relationships with industry and other entities that were reported at the time of peer  review, including those not deemed to be relevant to this document, at the time this document was under review. The table  does not necessarily reflect relationships with industry at the time of publication. A person is deemed to have a significant  interest in a business if the interest represents ownership of ≥5% of the voting stock or share of the business entity, or  ownership of ≥$5 000 of the fair market value of the business entity; or if funds received by the person from the business  entity exceed 5% of the person’s gross income for the previous year. Relationships that exist with no financial benefit are  also included for the purpose of transparency. Relationships in this table are modest unless otherwise noted. Please refer  to http://www.acc.org/guidelines/about-guidelines-and-clinical-documents/relationships-with-industry-policy for definitions  of disclosure categories or additional information about the ACC/AHA Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees. *No financial benefit. †Significant relationship. ‡This disclosure was entered under the Clinical Trial Enroller category in the ACC’s disclosure system. To appear in this  category, the author acknowledges that there is no direct or institutional relationship with the trial sponsor as defined in the  (ACCF or AHA/ACC) Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees. ACC indicates American College of Cardiology; ACCF, American College of Cardiology Foundation; AACP, American  Association of Colleges of Pharmacy; AHA, American Heart Association; AHRQ, Agency for Healthcare Research and  Quality; CCS, Canadian Cardiovascular Society; DCICDP, Diverse Clinical Investigator Career Development Program;  DSMB; data and safety monitoring board; HRS, Heart Rhythm Society; JCPM, ACC/AHA Joint Committee on  Performance Measures, NHLBI, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; and NIH, National Institutes of Health. Abbreviations ARB angiotensin receptor blocker AT atrial tachycardia A VNA atrioventricular nodal ablation BiVP biventricular pacing BMI body mass index BP blood pressure bpm beats per minute BTK Bruton’s tyrosine kinase CABG coronary artery bypass graft surgery CAD coronary artery disease CCD chronic coronary disease ACE angiotensin-converting enzyme ACHD adult congenital heart disease ACS acute coronary syndrome et al. Page 141 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

AF atrial fibrillation AFL atrial flutter AHRE atrial high-rate episodes ANS autonomic nervous system AP accessory pathway APT antiplatelet therapy CHADS2 congestive heart failure, hypertension, age >75  years, diabetes mellitus, stroke/transient ischemia attack/ thromboembolism CHA2DS2V ASc congestive heart failure, hypertension, age ≥75 years  (doubled), diabetes mellitus, prior stroke or transient  ischemic attack or thromboembolism (doubled), vascular  disease, age 65 to 74 years, sex category CHD congenital heart disease CHF congestive heart failure CKD chronic kidney disease COPD chronic obstructive pulmonary disease COR Class of Recommendation CrCl creatinine clearance CRT cardiac resynchronization therapy CTI cavotricuspid isthmus CVD cardiovascular disease DAT dual antithrombotic therapy DOAC direct oral anticoagulant ECG Electrocardiogram EF ejection fraction eGFR estimated glomerular filtration rate FDA US Food and Drug Administration GDMT guideline-directed management and therapy HF heart failure HFpEF heart failure with preserved ejection fraction et al. Page 142 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

HFrEF heart failure with reduced ejection fraction HR hazard ratio ICD implantable cardioverter-defibrillator ICH intracranial hemorrhage LA left atrium LAA left atrial appendage LAAO left atrial appendage occlusion LOE Level of Evidence LRFM lifestyle risk factor modification LV left ventricular LVEF left ventricular ejection fraction MI myocardial infarction MRA mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist NYHA New York Heart Association OAC oral anticoagulant PAC premature atrial contraction PAD peripheral artery disease PCI percutaneous coronary intervention PCC prothrombin complex concentrate PE pulmonary embolism PH pulmonary hypertension PHPVD pulmonary hypertension with pulmonary vascular disease PITP pill-in-the-pocket pLAAO percutaneous left atrial appendage occlusion PV pulmonary veins PVI pulmonary vein isolation QOL quality of life RAAS renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system RCT randomized controlled trial et al. Page 143 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

RV right ventricular RVP right ventricular pacing SDB sleep-disordered breathing SDOH social determinants of health SDM shared decision-making S-LAAO surgical removal of the left atrial appendage occlusion SVT supraventricular tachycardia TEE transesophageal echocardiogram TIA transient ischemic attack UREG underrepresented racial and ethnic groups VF ventricular fibrillation VHD valvular heart disease VKA vitamin K antagonist VT ventricular tachycardia WPW Wolff-Parkinson-White REFERENCES PREAMBLE 1. Committee on Standards for Developing Trustworthy Clinical Practice Guidelines, Institute of  Medicine (US). Clinical Practice Guidelines We Can Trust. National Academies Press; 2011. 2. Committee on Standards for Systematic Reviews of Comparative Effectiveness Research, Institute  of Medicine (US). Finding What Works in Healthcare: Standards for Systematic Reviews. National  Academies Press; 2011. 3. Anderson JL, Heidenreich PA, Barnett PG, et al. ACC/AHA statement on cost/value methodology  in clinical practice guidelines and performance measures: a report of the American College of  Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Performance Measures and Task Force on  Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;129:2329–2345. [PubMed: 24677315]  4. ACCF/AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Methodology Manual and Policies From  the ACCF/AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines. American College of Cardiology and  American Heart Association. 2010. Accessed September 23, 2019. https://www.acc.org/Guidelines/ About-Guidelines-and-Clinical-Documents/Methodology and https://professional.heart.org/-/media/ phd-files/guidelines-and-statements/methodology_manual_and_policies_ucm_319826.pdf. 5. Halperin JL, Levine GN, Al-Khatib SM, et al. Further evolution of the ACC/AHA clinical  practice guideline recommendation classification system: a report of the American College of  Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation.  2016;133:1426–1428. [PubMed: 26399660]  6. Arnett DK, Goodman RA, Halperin JL, et al. AHA/ACC/HHS strategies to enhance application of  clinical practice guidelines in patients with cardiovascular disease and comorbid conditions: from  the American Heart Association, American College of Cardiology, and US Department of Health  and Human Services. Circulation. 2014;130:1662–1667. [PubMed: 25212466]  et al. Page 144 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

7. Levine GN, O’Gara PT, Beckman JA, et al. Recent innovations, modifications, and evolution of  ACC/AHA clinical practice guidelines: an update for our constituencies: a report of the American  College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines.  Circulation. 2019;139:e879–e886. [PubMed: 30892927]  1.4. Scope of the Guideline 1. January CT, Wann LS, Calkins H, et al. 2019 AHA/ACC/HRS focused update of the 2014  AHA/ACC/HRS guideline for the management of patients with atrial fibrillation: a report of the  American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice  Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. Circulation. 2019;140:e125–e151. [PubMed: 30686041]  2. January CT, Wann LS, Alpert JS, et al. 2014 AHA/ACC/HRS guideline for the management  of patients with atrial fibrillation: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American  Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. Circulation.  2019;140:e125–e151. [PubMed: 30686041]  3. Hindricks G, Potpara T, Dagres N, et al. 2020 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and management of  atrial fibrillation Developed in collaboration with the European Association for Cardio-Thoracic  Surgery (EACTS): the Task Force for the Diagnosis and Management of Atrial Fibrillation  of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) Developed with the special contribution of the  European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA) of the ESC. Eur Heart J. 2021;42:373–498. [PubMed:  32860505]  4. Andrade JG, Aguilar M, Atzema C, et al. The 2020 Canadian Cardiovascular Society/Canadian  Heart Rhythm Society comprehensive guidelines for the management of atrial fibrillation. Can J  Cardiol. 2020;36:1847–1948. [PubMed: 33191198]  5. Stout KK, Daniels CJ, Aboulhosn JA, et al. 2018 AHA/ACC guideline for the management of  adults with congenital heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American  Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2019;139:e698–e800.  [PubMed: 30586767]  6. Ommen SR, Mital S, Burke MA, et al. 2020 AHA/ACC guideline for the diagnosis and treatment  of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a report of the American College of Cardiology/ American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation.  2020;142:e558–e631. [PubMed: 33215931]  7. Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al. 2020 ACC/AHA guideline for the management of  patients with valvular heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American  Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2021;143:e72– e227. [PubMed: 33332150]  8. Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al. 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI guideline for coronary  artery revascularization: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart  Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2022;145:e18–e114.  [PubMed: 34882435]  9. Gulati M, Levy PD, Mukherjee D, et al. 2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/SCMR  guideline for the evaluation and diagnosis of chest pain: a report of the American College  of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines.  Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. 10. Kleindorfer DO, Towfighi A, Chaturvedi S, et al. 2021 guideline for the prevention of stroke  in patients with stroke and transient ischemic attack: a guideline from the American Heart  Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2021;52:e364–e467. [PubMed: 34024117]  11. Heidenreich PA, Bozkurt B, Aguilar D, et al. 2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA guideline for the  management of heart failure: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart  Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2022;145:e895–e1032.  [PubMed: 35363499]  12. Joglar JA, Kapa S, Saarel EV , et al. 2023 HRS expert consensus statement on the management of  arrhythmias during pregnancy. Heart Rhythm. 2023; doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2023.05.01 et al. Page 145 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

2.1. Epidemiology 1. Schnabel RB, Yin X, Gona P, et al. 50 year trends in atrial fibrillation prevalence, incidence, risk  factors, and mortality in the Framingham Heart Study: a cohort study. Lancet. 2015;386:154–162.  [PubMed: 25960110]  2. Tsao CW, Aday AW, Almarzooq ZI, et al. Heart disease and stroke statistics-2023 update: a report  from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2023;147:e93–e621. [PubMed: 36695182]  3. Chugh SS, Havmoeller R, Narayanan K, et al. Worldwide epidemiology of atrial fibrillation: a  Global Burden of Disease 2010 study. Circulation. 2014;129:837–847. [PubMed: 24345399]  4. Turakhia MP, Guo JD, Keshishian A, et al. Contemporary prevalence estimates of undiagnosed  and diagnosed atrial fibrillation in the United States. Clin Cardiol. 2023;46:484–493. [PubMed:  36855960]  5. Deshmukh A, Iglesias M, Khanna R, et al. Healthcare utilization and costs associated with a  diagnosis of incident atrial fibrillation. Heart Rhythm O2. 2022;3:577–586. [PubMed: 36340482]  6. Dieleman JL, Cao J, Chapin A, et al. US health care spending by payer and health condition,  1996–2016. JAMA. 2020;323:863–884. [PubMed: 32125402]  7. Dai H, Zhang Q, Much AA, et al. Global, regional, and national prevalence, incidence, mortality,  and risk factors for atrial fibrillation, 1990–2017: results from the Global Burden of Disease Study  2017. Eur Heart J Qual Care Clin Outcomes. 2021;7:574–582. [PubMed: 32735316]  8. Piccini JP, Hammill BG, Sinner MF, et al. Incidence and prevalence of atrial fibrillation and  associated mortality among Medicare beneficiaries, 19932007. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes.  2012;5:85–93. [PubMed: 22235070]  2.1.1. Prevalence, Incidence, Morbidity, and Mortality 1. Colilla S, Crow A, Petkun W, et al. Estimates of current and future incidence and prevalence  of atrial fibrillation in the US adult population. Am J Cardiol. 2013;112:1142–1147. [PubMed:  23831166]  2. Mou L, Norby FL, Chen LY , et al. Lifetime risk of atrial fibrillation by race and socioeconomic  status: ARIC study (Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities). Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol.  2018;11:e006350. [PubMed: 30002066]  3. Weng LC, Preis SR, Hulme OL, et al. Genetic predisposition, clinical risk factor burden, and  lifetime risk of atrial fibrillation. Circulation. 2018;137:1027–1038. [PubMed: 29129827]  4. Staerk L, Wang B, Preis SR, et al. Lifetime risk of atrial fibrillation according to optimal, borderline,  or elevated levels of risk factors: cohort study based on longitudinal data from the Framingham  Heart Study. BMJ. 2018;361:k1453. [PubMed: 29699974]  5. Chao TF, Liu CJ, Tuan TC, et al. Lifetime risks, projected numbers, and adverse outcomes in  Asian patients with atrial fibrillation: a report from the Taiwan Nationwide AF Cohort Study. Chest.  2018;153:453–466. [PubMed: 29017957]  6. Emdin CA, Wong CX, Hsiao AJ, et al. Atrial fibrillation as risk factor for cardiovascular disease and  death in women compared with men: systematic review and meta-analysis of cohort studies. BMJ.  2016;532:h7013. [PubMed: 26786546]  7. Odutayo A, Wong CX, Hsiao AJ, et al. Atrial fibrillation and risks of cardiovascular disease,  renal disease, and death: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ. 2016;354:i4482. [PubMed:  27599725]  8. Papanastasiou CA, Theochari CA, Zareifopoulos N, et al. Atrial fibrillation is associated with  cognitive impairment, all-cause dementia, vascular dementia, and Alzheimer's disease: a systematic  review and meta-analysis. J Gen Intern Med. 2021;36:3122–3135. [PubMed: 34244959]  9. Ruddox V , Sandven I, Munkhaugen J, et al. Atrial fibrillation and the risk for myocardial infarction,  all-cause mortality and heart failure: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Prev Cardiol.  2017;24:1555–1566. [PubMed: 28617620]  10. Rattanawong P, Upala S, Riangwiwat T, et al. Atrial fibrillation is associated with sudden cardiac  death: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Interv Card Electrophysiol. 2018;51:91–104.  [PubMed: 29332241]  et al. Page 146 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

11. Piccini JP, Hammill BG, Sinner MF, et al. Clinical course of atrial fibrillation in older adults:  the importance of cardiovascular events beyond stroke. Eur Heart J. 2014;35:250–256. [PubMed:  24282186]  2.1.2. Risk Factors and Associated Heart Disease 1. Belbasis L, Mavrogiannis MC, Emfietzoglou M, et al. Environmental factors, serum biomarkers  and risk of atrial fibrillation: an exposure-wide umbrella review of meta-analyses. Eur J Epidemiol.  2020;35:223–239. [PubMed: 32180061]  2. Alonso A, Krijthe BP, Aspelund T, et al. Simple risk model predicts incidence of atrial fibrillation in  a racially and geographically diverse population: the CHARGE-AF consortium. J Am Heart Assoc.  2013;2:e000102. [PubMed: 23537808]  3. Allan V , Honarbakhsh S, Casas JP, et al. Are cardiovascular risk factors also associated with  the incidence of atrial fibrillation? A systematic review and field synopsis of 23 factors in  32 population-based cohorts of 20 million participants. Thromb Haemost. 2017;117:837–850.  [PubMed: 28229164]  4. Roberts JD, Vittinghoff E, Lu AT, et al. Epigenetic age and the risk of incident atrial fibrillation.  Circulation. 2021;144:1899–1911. [PubMed: 34587750]  5. Huxley RR, Lopez FL, Folsom AR, et al. Absolute and attributable risks of atrial fibrillation in  relation to optimal and borderline risk factors: the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC)  study. Circulation. 2011;123:1501–1508. [PubMed: 21444879]  6. Aune D, Schlesinger S, Norat T, et al. Tobacco smoking and the risk of atrial fibrillation: a  systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective studies. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2018;25:1437–1451.  [PubMed: 29996680]  7. Lu Y , Guo Y , Lin H, et al. Genetically determined tobacco and alcohol use and risk of atrial  fibrillation. BMC Med Genomics. 2021;14:73. [PubMed: 33750369]  8. Mohanty S, Mohanty P, Tamaki M, et al. Differential association of exercise intensity with risk of  atrial fibrillation in men and women: evidence from a meta-analysis. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol.  2016;27:1021–1029. [PubMed: 27245609]  9. Mishima RS, Verdicchio CV , Noubiap JJ, et al. Self-reported physical activity and atrial fibrillation  risk: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Heart Rhythm. 2021;18:520–528. [PubMed: 33348059]  10. Newman W, Parry-Williams G, Wiles J, et al. Risk of atrial fibrillation in athletes: a systematic  review and meta-analysis. Br J Sports Med. 2021;55:1233–1238. [PubMed: 34253538]  11. Hegbom F, Stavem K, Sire S, et al. Effects of short-term exercise training on symptoms and  quality of life in patients with chronic atrial fibrillation. Int J Cardiol. 2007;116:86–92. [PubMed:  16815571]  12. Malmo V , Nes BM, Amundsen BH, et al. Aerobic interval training reduces the burden of  atrial fibrillation in the short term: a randomized trial. Circulation. 2016;133:466–473. [PubMed:  26733609]  13. Elliott AD, Verdicchio CV , Mahajan R, et al. An exercise and physical activity program in patients  with atrial fibrillation: the ACTIVE-AF randomized controlled trial. JACC Clin Electrophysiol.  2023;9:455–465. [PubMed: 36752479]  14. Pathak RK, Elliott A, Middeldorp ME, et al. Impact of CARDIOrespiratory FITness on arrhythmia  recurrence in obese individuals with atrial fibrillation: the CARDIO-FIT study. J Am Coll Cardiol.  2015;66:985–996. [PubMed: 26113406]  15. Oesterle A, Giancaterino S, Van Noord MG, et al. Effects of supervised exercise training on  atrial fibrillation: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev.  2022;42:258–265. [PubMed: 35235540]  16. Osbak PS, Mourier M, Kjaer A, et al. A randomized study of the effects of exercise training on  patients with atrial fibrillation. Am Heart J. 2011;162:1080–1087. [PubMed: 22137082]  17. Marcus GM, Vittinghoff E, Whitman IR, et al. Acute consumption of alcohol and discrete atrial  fibrillation events. Ann Intern Med. 2021;174:1503–1509. [PubMed: 34461028]  et al. Page 147 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

18. Dukes JW, Dewland TA, Vittinghoff E, et al. Access to alcohol and heart disease among patients in  hospital: observational cohort study using differences in alcohol sales laws. BMJ. 2016;353:i2714.  [PubMed: 27301557]  19. V oskoboinik A, Kalman JM, De Silva A, et al. Alcohol abstinence in drinkers with atrial  fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2020;382:20–28. [PubMed: 31893513]  20. Marcus GM, Modrow MF, Schmid CH, et al. Individualized studies of triggers of paroxysmal  atrial fibrillation: the I-STOP-AFib randomized clinical trial. JAMA Cardiol. 2022;7:167–174.  [PubMed: 34775507]  21. Abed HS, Wittert GA, Leong DP, et al. Effect of weight reduction and cardiometabolic risk factor  management on symptom burden and severity in patients with atrial fibrillation: a randomized  clinical trial. JAMA. 2013;310:2050–2060. [PubMed: 24240932]  22. Pathak RK, Middeldorp ME, Lau DH, et al. Aggressive risk factor reduction study for atrial  fibrillation and implications for the outcome of ablation: the ARREST-AF cohort study. J Am Coll  Cardiol. 2014;64:2222–2231. [PubMed: 25456757]  23. Pathak RK, Middeldorp ME, Meredith M, et al. Long-term effect of goal-directed weight  management in an atrial fibrillation cohort: a long-term follow-up study (LEGACY). J Am Coll  Cardiol. 2015;65:2159–2169. [PubMed: 25792361]  24. Middeldorp ME, Pathak RK, Meredith M, et al. PREVEntion and regReSsive Effect of weightloss and risk factor modification on Atrial Fibrillation: the REVERSE-AF study. Europace.  2018;20:1929–1935. [PubMed: 29912366]  25. Larsson SC, Drca N, Wolk A. Alcohol consumption and risk of atrial fibrillation: a prospective  study and dose-response meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:281–289. [PubMed:  25034065]  26. Schnabel RB, Yin X, Gona P, et al. 50 year trends in atrial fibrillation prevalence, incidence, risk  factors, and mortality in the Framingham Heart Study: a cohort study. Lancet. 2015;386:154–162.  [PubMed: 25960110]  27. Donnellan E, Wazni O, Kanj M, et al. Outcomes of atrial fibrillation ablation in morbidly  obese patients following bariatric surgery compared with a nonobese cohort. Circ Arrhythm  Electrophysiol. 2019;12:e007598. [PubMed: 31610693]  28. Donnellan E, Wazni OM, Kanj M, et al. Association between pre-ablation bariatric surgery and  atrial fibrillation recurrence in morbidly obese patients undergoing atrial fibrillation ablation.  Europace. 2019;21:1476–1483. [PubMed: 31304532]  29. Donnellan E, Wazni OM, Elshazly M, et al. Impact of bariatric surgery on atrial fibrillation type.  Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2020;13:e007626. [PubMed: 31940441]  30. Mohanty S, Mohanty P, Natale V , et al. Impact of weight loss on ablation outcome in obese  patients with longstanding persistent atrial fibrillation. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2018;29:246– 253. [PubMed: 29171116]  31. Aune D, Sen A, Schlesinger S, et al. Body mass index, abdominal fatness, fat mass and the risk of  atrial fibrillation: a systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis of prospective studies. Eur  J Epidemiol. 2017;32:181–192. [PubMed: 28194602]  32. Zhou Y , Zha L, Pan S. The risk of atrial fibrillation increases with earlier onset of obesity: a  Mendelian randomization study. Int J Med Sci. 2022;19:1388–1398. [PubMed: 36035367]  33. Wang Q, Richardson TG, Sanderson E, et al. A phenome-wide bidirectional Mendelian  randomization analysis of atrial fibrillation. Int J Epidemiol. 2022;51:1153–1166. [PubMed:  35292824]  34. Steinberg JS, Shabanov V , Ponomarev D, et al. Effect of renal denervation and catheter ablation  vs catheter ablation alone on atrial fibrillation recurrence among patients with paroxysmal  atrial fibrillation and hypertension: the ERADICATE-AF randomized clinical trial. JAMA.  2020;323:248–255. [PubMed: 31961420]  35. Neefs J, van den Berg NW, Limpens J, et al. Aldosterone pathway blockade to prevent atrial  fibrillation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Cardiol. 2017;231:155–161. [PubMed:  28062142]  36. Parkash R, Wells GA, Sapp JL, et al. Effect of aggressive blood pressure control on the recurrence  of atrial fibrillation after catheter ablation: a randomized, open-label clinical trial (SMAC-AF  et al. Page 148 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

[Substrate Modification With Aggressive Blood Pressure Control]). Circulation. 2017;135:1788– 1798. [PubMed: 28228428]  37. Soliman EZ, Rahman AF, Zhang ZM, et al. Effect of intensive blood pressure lowering on the risk  of atrial fibrillation. Hypertension. 2020;75:1491–1496. [PubMed: 32362229]  38. Pinho-Gomes AC, Azevedo L, Copland E, et al. Blood pressure-lowering treatment for the  prevention of cardiovascular events in patients with atrial fibrillation: an individual participant  data meta-analysis. PLoS Med. 2021;18:e1003599. [PubMed: 34061831]  39. Le NN, Tran TQB, Lip S, et al. Unravelling the distinct effects of systolic and diastolic blood  pressure using Mendelian randomisation. Genes (Basel). 2022;13:1226. [PubMed: 35886009]  40. Hyman MC, Levin MG, Gill D, et al. Genetically predicted blood pressure and risk of atrial  fibrillation. Hypertension. 2021;77:376–382. [PubMed: 33390040]  41. Liu X, Guo N, Zhu W, et al. Resting heart rate and the risk of atrial fibrillation. Int Heart J.  2019;60:805–811. [PubMed: 31204373]  42. Siland JE, Geelhoed B, Roselli C, et al. Resting heart rate and incident atrial fibrillation: a stratified  Mendelian randomization in the AFGen consortium. PLoS One. 2022;17:e0268768. [PubMed:  35594314]  43. Donnellan E, Aagaard P, Kanj M, et al. Association between pre-ablation glycemic control  and outcomes among patients with diabetes undergoing atrial fibrillation ablation. JACC Clin  Electrophysiol. 2019;5:897–903. [PubMed: 31439289]  44. Aune D, Feng T, Schlesinger S, et al. Diabetes mellitus, blood glucose and the risk of atrial  fibrillation: a systematic review and meta-analysis of cohort studies. J Diabetes Complications.  2018;32:501–511. [PubMed: 29653902]  45. Santhanakrishnan R, Wang N, Larson MG, et al. Atrial fibrillation begets heart failure and  vice versa: temporal associations and differences in preserved versus reduced ejection fraction.  Circulation. 2016;133:484–492. [PubMed: 26746177]  46. Kwok MK, Schooling CM. Mendelian randomization study on atrial fibrillation and cardiovascular  disease subtypes. Sci Rep. 2021;11:18682. [PubMed: 34548541]  47. Schnabel RB, Sullivan LM, Levy D, et al. Development of a risk score for atrial fibrillation  (Framingham Heart Study): a community-based cohort study. Lancet. 2009;373:739–745.  [PubMed: 19249635]  48. Gao J, Bai Y , Ji H. Genetically predicted atrial fibrillation and valvular heart disease: a two-sample  Mendelian randomization study. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2022;9:845734. [PubMed: 35419428]  49. Mathew JP, Fontes ML, Tudor IC, et al. A multicenter risk index for atrial fibrillation after cardiac  surgery. JAMA. 2004;291:1720–1729. [PubMed: 15082699]  50. Filardo G, da Graca B, Sass DM, et al. Preoperative β-blockers as a coronary surgery quality  metric: the lack of evidence of efficacy. Ann Thorac Surg. 2020;109:1150–1158. [PubMed:  31513778]  51. Gillinov AM, Bagiella E, Moskowitz AJ, et al. Rate control versus rhythm control for atrial  fibrillation after cardiac surgery. N Engl J Med. 2016;374:1911–1921. [PubMed: 27043047]  52. Mehaffey JH, Hawkins RB, Byler M, et al. Amiodarone protocol provides cost-effective reduction  in postoperative atrial fibrillation. Ann Thorac Surg. 2018;105:1697–1702. [PubMed: 29374511]  53. Guarnieri T Intravenous antiarrhythmic regimens with focus on amiodarone for prophylaxis of  atrial fibrillation after open heart surgery. Am J Cardiol. 1999;84:152r–155r. [PubMed: 10426331]  54. Mitchell LB, Exner DV , Wyse DG, et al. Prophylactic oral amiodarone for the prevention of  arrhythmias that begin early after revascularization, valve replacement, or repair: PAPABEAR: a  randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2005;294:3093–3100. [PubMed: 16380589]  55. Gaudino M, Sanna T, Ballman KV , et al. Posterior left pericardiotomy for the prevention of atrial  fibrillation after cardiac surgery: an adaptive, singlecentre, single-blind, randomised, controlled  trial. Lancet. 2021;398:2075–2083. [PubMed: 34788640]  56. Eikelboom R, Sanjanwala R, Le ML, et al. Postoperative atrial fibrillation after cardiac surgery: a  systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Thorac Surg. 2021;111:544–554. [PubMed: 32687821]  57. Woldendorp K, Farag J, Khadra S, et al. Postoperative atrial fibrillation after cardiac surgery: a  meta-analysis. Ann Thorac Surg. 2021;112:2084–2093. [PubMed: 33340521]  et al. Page 149 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

58. Shang W, Li L, Huang S, et al. Chronic kidney disease and the risk of new-onset atrial fibrillation:  a meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. PLoS One. 2016;11:e0155581. [PubMed: 27175779]  59. Geurts S, van der Burgh AC, Bos MM, et al. Disentangling the association between kidney  function and atrial fibrillation: a bidirectional Mendelian randomization study. Int J Cardiol.  2022;355:15–22. [PubMed: 35278573]  60. Park S, Lee S, Kim Y , et al. Atrial fibrillation and kidney function: a bidirectional Mendelian  randomization study. Eur Heart J. 2021;42:2816–2823. [PubMed: 34023889]  61. Zhang D, Ma Y , Xu J, et al. Association between obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) and atrial  fibrillation (AF): a dose-response meta-analysis. Medicine (Baltim). 2022;101:e29443. 62. Li X, Zhou X, Xu X, et al. Effects of continuous positive airway pressure treatment in obstructive  sleep apnea patients with atrial fibrillation: a meta-analysis. Medicine (Baltim). 2021;100:e25438. 63. Yang Y , Ning Y , Wen W, et al. CPAP is associated with decreased risk of AF recurrence in patients  with OSA, especially those younger and slimmer: a meta-analysis. J Interv Card Electrophysiol.  2020;58:369–379. [PubMed: 32472281]  64. Congrete S, Bintvihok M, Thongprayoon C, et al. Effect of obstructive sleep apnea and its  treatment of atrial fibrillation recurrence after radiofrequency catheter ablation: a meta-analysis. J  Evid Based Med. 2018;11:145–151. [PubMed: 30091301]  65. Deng F, Raza A, Guo J. Treating obstructive sleep apnea with continuous positive airway pressure  reduces risk of recurrent atrial fibrillation after catheter ablation: a meta-analysis. Sleep Med.  2018;46:5–11. [PubMed: 29773211]  66. Qureshi WT, Nasir UB, Alqalyoobi S, et al. Meta-analysis of continuous positive airway pressure  as a therapy of atrial fibrillation in obstructive sleep apnea. Am J Cardiol. 2015;116:1767–1773.  [PubMed: 26482182]  67. Szymanski FM, Filipiak KJ, Platek AE, et al. Presence and severity of obstructive sleep apnea  and remote outcomes of atrial fibrillation ablationsa long-term prospective, cross-sectional cohort  study. Sleep Breath. 2015;19:849–856. [PubMed: 25566942]  68. Caples SM, Mansukhani MP, Friedman PA, et al. The impact of continuous positive airway  pressure treatment on the recurrence of atrial fibrillation post cardioversion: a randomized  controlled trial. Int J Cardiol. 2019;278:133–136. [PubMed: 30522886]  69. Traaen GM, Aakeroy L, Hunt TE, et al. Effect of continuous positive airway pressure on  arrhythmia in atrial fibrillation and sleep apnea: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Respir Crit  Care Med. 2021;204:573–582. [PubMed: 33938787]  70. Hunt TE, Traaen GM, Aakeroy L, et al. Effect of continuous positive airway pressure therapy on  recurrence of atrial fibrillation after pulmonary vein isolation in patients with obstructive sleep  apnea: a randomized controlled trial. Heart Rhythm. 2022;19:1433–1441. [PubMed: 35716856]  71. Chen L, Sun X, He Y , et al. Obstructive sleep apnea and atrial fibrillation: insights from  a bidirectional Mendelian randomization study. BMC Med Genomics. 2022;15:28. [PubMed:  35172829]  72. Huang M, Yang S, Ge G, et al. Effects of thyroid dysfunction and the thyroid-stimulating hormone  levels on the risk of atrial fibrillation: a systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis from  cohort studies. Endocr Pract. 2022;28:822–831. [PubMed: 35660465]  73. Ellervik C, Roselli C, Christophersen IE, et al. Assessment of the relationship between genetic  determinants of thyroid function and atrial fibrillation: a Mendelian randomization study. JAMA  Cardiol. 2019;4:144–152. [PubMed: 30673084]  74. Walkey AJ, Wiener RS, Ghobrial JM, et al. Incident stroke and mortality associated with newonset atrial fibrillation in patients hospitalized with severe sepsis. JAMA. 2011;306:2248–2254.  [PubMed: 22081378]  75. Walkey AJ, Greiner MA, Heckbert SR, et al. Atrial fibrillation among Medicare beneficiaries  hospitalized with sepsis: incidence and risk factors. Am Heart J. 2013;165:949–955 e943.  [PubMed: 23708166]  76. Bosch NA, Cohen DM, Walkey AJ. Risk factors for new-onset atrial fibrillation in patients  with sepsis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care Med. 2019;47:280–287. [PubMed:  30653473]  et al. Page 150 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

77. Kwok CS, Rashid M, Beynon R, et al. Prolonged PR interval, first-degree heart block and  adverse cardiovascular outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Heart. 2016;102:672– 680. [PubMed: 26879241]  78. Ntalla I, Weng LC, Cartwright JH, et al. Multi-ancestry GW AS of the electrocardiographic PR  interval identifies 202 loci underlying cardiac conduction. Nat Commun. 2020;11:2542. [PubMed:  32439900]  79. Xiang H, Xue Y , Chen Z, et al. The association between left ventricular hypertrophy and  the occurrence and prognosis of atrial fibrillation: a meta-analysis. Front Cardiovasc Med.  2021;8:639993. [PubMed: 34395549]  80. Sinner MF, Stepas KA, Moser CB, et al. B-type natriuretic peptide and C-reactive protein in the  prediction of atrial fibrillation risk: the CHARGE-AF Consortium of community-based cohort  studies. Europace. 2014;16:1426–1433. [PubMed: 25037055]  81. Geelhoed B, Borschel CS, Niiranen T, et al. Assessment of causality of natriuretic peptides and  atrial fibrillation and heart failure: a Mendelian randomization study in the FINRISK cohort.  Europace. 2020;22:1463–1469. [PubMed: 32830215]  82. Wu N, Xu B, Xiang Y , et al. Association of inflammatory factors with occurrence and recurrence  of atrial fibrillation: a meta-analysis. Int J Cardiol. 2013;169:62–72. [PubMed: 24095158]  83. Mohammadi-Shemirani P, Chong M, Narula S, et al. Elevated lipoprotein(a) and risk of  atrial fibrillation: an observational and Mendelian randomization study. J Am Coll Cardiol.  2022;79:1579–1590. [PubMed: 35450575]  84. Vaziri SM, Larson MG, Benjamin EJ, et al. Echocardiographic predictors of nonrheumatic atrial  fibrillation. The Framingham Heart Study. Circulation. 1994;89:724–730. [PubMed: 8313561]  85. Olsen FJ, Mogelvang R, Jensen GB, et al. Relationship between left atrial functional measures  and incident atrial fibrillation in the general population: the Copenhagen City Heart Study. JACC  Cardiovasc Imaging. 2019;12:981–989. [PubMed: 29454773]  86. Scherer M, Therapidis P, Miskovic A, et al. Left atrial size reduction improves the sinus  rhythm conversion rate after radiofrequency ablation for continuous atrial fibrillation in patients  undergoing concomitant cardiac surgery. Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2006;54:34–38. [PubMed:  16485186]  87. Scherer M, Dzemali O, Aybek T, et al. Impact of left atrial size reduction on chronic atrial  fibrillation in mitral valve surgery. J Heart Valve Dis. 2003;12:469–474. [PubMed: 12918849]  88. Scherer M, Therapidis P, Wittlinger T, et al. Impact of left atrial size reduction and endocardial  radiofrequency ablation on continuous atrial fibrillation in patients undergoing concomitant  cardiac surgery: three-year results. J Heart Valve Dis. 2007;16:126–131. [PubMed: 17484458]  89. Joshibayev S, Bolatbekov B. Early and long-term outcomes and quality of life after concomitant  mitral valve surgery, left atrial size reduction, and radiofrequency surgical ablation of atrial  fibrillation. Anatol J Cardiol. 2016;16:797–803. [PubMed: 27025202]  90. van de Vegte YJ, Siland JE, Rienstra M, et al. Atrial fibrillation and left atrial size and function: a  Mendelian randomization study. Sci Rep. 2021;11:8431. [PubMed: 33875748]  91. Mou L, Norby FL, Chen LY , et al. Lifetime risk of atrial fibrillation by race and socioeconomic  status: ARIC study (Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities). Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol.  2018;11:e006350. [PubMed: 30002066]  92. Lunde ED, Joensen AM, Lundbye-Christensen S, et al. Socioeconomic position and risk of atrial  fibrillation: a nationwide Danish cohort study. J Epidemiol Community Health. 2020;74:7–13.  [PubMed: 31619458]  93. Liu Y , Liu C, Liu Q. Education and atrial fibrillation: Mendelian randomization study. Glob Heart.  2022;17:22. [PubMed: 35586743]  94. Bonaccio M, Di Castelnuovo A, Costanzo S, et al. Life course socioeconomic status and risk of  hospitalization for heart failure or atrial fibrillation in the Moli-Sani study cohort. Am J Epidemiol.  2021;kwab046. [PubMed: 33623982]  95. Chung SC, Sofat R, Acosta-Mena D, et al. Atrial fibrillation epidemiology, disparity and  healthcare contacts: a population-wide study of 56 million individuals. Lancet Reg Health Eur.  2021;7:100157. [PubMed: 34405204]  et al. Page 151 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

96. Lunde ED, Nielsen PB, Riahi S, et al. Associations between socioeconomic status, atrial  fibrillation, and outcomes: a systematic review. Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther. 2018;16:857–873.  [PubMed: 30293472]  97. Alzahrani Z, Ornelas-Loredo A, Darbar SD, et al. Association between family history and earlyonset atrial fibrillation across racial and ethnic groups. JAMA Netw Open. 2018;1:e182497.  [PubMed: 30646169]  98. Arnar DO, Thorvaldsson S, Manolio TA, et al. Familial aggregation of atrial fibrillation in Iceland.  Eur Heart J. 2006;27:708–712. [PubMed: 16428254]  99. Lubitz SA, Yin X, Fontes JD, et al. Association between familial atrial fibrillation and risk of  new-onset atrial fibrillation. JAMA. 2010;304:2263–2269. [PubMed: 21076174]  100. Roselli C, Chaffin MD, Weng LC, et al. Multi-ethnic genome-wide association study for atrial  fibrillation. Nat Genet. 2018;50:1225–1233. [PubMed: 29892015]  101. Nielsen JB, Thorolfsdottir RB, Fritsche LG, et al. Biobank-driven genom-ic discovery yields new  insight into atrial fibrillation biology. Nat Genet. 2018;50:1234–1239. [PubMed: 30061737]  2.2.2. Associated Arrhythmias 1. Saoudi N, Cosio F, Waldo A, et al. A classification of atrial flutter and regular atrial tachycardia  according to electrophysiological mechanisms and anatomical bases; a statement from a Joint  Expert Group from The Working Group of Arrhythmias of the European Society of Cardiology  and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology. Eur Heart J. 2001;22:1162–1182.  [PubMed: 11440490]  2. Brugada J, Katritsis DG, Arbelo E, et al. 2019 ESC guidelines for the management of patients with  supraventricular tachycardia. Eur Heart J. 2020;41:655–720. [PubMed: 31504425]  3. Wellens HJ. Contemporary management of atrial flutter. Circulation. 2002;106:649–652. [PubMed:  12163422]  2.3. Mechanisms and Pathophysiology 1. Haissaguerre M, Jais P, Shah DC, et al. Spontaneous initiation of atrial fibrillation by ectopic beats  originating in the pulmonary veins. N Engl J Med. 1998;339:659–666. [PubMed: 9725923]  2. Allessie M, Ausma J, Schotten U. Electrical, contractile and structural remodeling during atrial  fibrillation. Cardiovasc Res. 2002;54:230–246. [PubMed: 12062329]  2.3.1. Electrophysiological Mechanisms and Electrical Remodeling 1. Haissaguerre M, Jais P, Shah DC, et al. Spontaneous initiation of atrial fibrillation by ectopic beats  originating in the pulmonary veins. N Engl J Med. 1998;339:659–666. [PubMed: 9725923]  2. Egorov YV , Rosenshtraukh LV , Glukhov A V . Arrhythmogenic Interaction Between Sympathetic  Tone and Mechanical Stretch in Rat Pulmonary Vein Myocardium. Front Physiol. 2020;11:237.  [PubMed: 32273849]  3. Van Wagoner DR, Pond AL, Lamorgese M, et al. Atrial L-type Ca2+ currents and human atrial  fibrillation. Circ Res. 1999;85:428–436. [PubMed: 10473672]  4. Van Wagoner DR, Pond AL, McCarthy PM, et al. Outward K+ current densities and Kv15  expression are reduced in chronic human atrial fibrillation. Circ Res. 1997;80:772–781. [PubMed:  9168779]  5. V oigt N, Trausch A, Knaut M, et al. Left-to-right atrial inward rectifier potassium current gradients  in patients with paroxysmal versus chronic atrial fibrillation. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol.  2010;3:472–480. [PubMed: 20657029]  6. Gemel J, Levy AE, Simon AR, et al. Connexin40 abnormalities and atrial fibrillation in the human  heart. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2014;76:159–168. [PubMed: 25200600]  7. Wirka RC, Gore S, Van Wagoner DR, et al. A common connexin-40 gene promoter variant affects  connexin-40 expression in human atria and is associated with atrial fibrillation. Circ Arrhythm  Electrophysiol. 2011;4:87–93. [PubMed: 21076161]  et al. Page 152 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

8. Lazzerini PE, Laghi-Pasini F, Acampa M, et al. Systemic Inflammation Rapidly Induces  Reversible Atrial Electrical Remodeling: The Role of Interleukin-6-Mediated Changes in Connexin  Expression. J Am Heart Assoc. 2019;8:e011006. [PubMed: 31423933]  9. Yan J, Kong W, Zhang Q, et al. c-Jun N-terminal kinase activation contributes to reduced  connexin43 and development of atrial arrhythmias. Cardiovasc Res. 2013;97:589–597. [PubMed:  23241357]  10. Iwasaki YK, Kato T, Xiong F, et al. Atrial fibrillation promotion with long-term repetitive  obstructive sleep apnea in a rat model. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:2013–2023. [PubMed:  25440097]  11. Landstrom AP, Dobrev D, Wehrens XHT. Calcium Signaling and Cardiac Arrhythmias. Circ Res.  2017;120:1969–1993. [PubMed: 28596175]  12. Greer-Short A, Musa H, Alsina KM, et al. Calmodulin kinase II regulates atrial myocyte  late sodium current, calcium handling, and atrial arrhythmia. Heart Rhythm. 2020;17:503–511.  [PubMed: 31622781]  13. V oigt N, Li N, Wang Q, et al. Enhanced sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ leak and increased Na+Ca2+ exchanger function underlie delayed afterdepolarizations in patients with chronic atrial  fibrillation. Circulation. 2012;125:2059–2070. [PubMed: 22456474]  14. Wang X, Chen X, Dobrev D, et al. The crosstalk between cardiomyocyte calcium and  inflammasome signaling pathways in atrial fibrillation. Pflugers Arch. 2021;473:389–405.  [PubMed: 33511453]  2.3.1.1. Triggers of AF 1. Haissaguerre M, Jais P, Shah DC, et al. Spontaneous initiation of atrial fibrillation by ectopic beats  originating in the pulmonary veins. N Engl J Med. 1998;339:659–666. [PubMed: 9725923]  2. Dewland TA, Vittinghoff E, Mandyam MC, et al. Atrial ectopy as a predictor of incident atrial  fibrillation: a cohort study. Ann Intern Med. 2013;159:721–728. [PubMed: 24297188]  3. Heckbert SR, Jensen PN, Austin TR, et al. Associations of left atrial function and structure  with supraventricular ectopy: the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis. J Am Heart Assoc.  2021;10:e018093. [PubMed: 33538182]  4. Howell SJ, Dukes JW, Vittinghoff E, et al. Premature atrial contraction location and atrial fibrillation  inducibility. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2023;16:e011623. [PubMed: 36688298]  5. V oigt N, Trausch A, Knaut M, et al. Left-to-right atrial inward rectifier potassium current gradients  in patients with paroxysmal versus chronic atrial fibrillation. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol.  2010;3:472–480. [PubMed: 20657029]  6. Ryu K, Sahadevan J, Khrestian CM, et al. Frequency analysis of atrial electrograms identifies  conduction pathways from the left to the right atrium during atrial fibrillation-studies in two canine  models. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2009;20:667–674. [PubMed: 19207775]  2.3.2. Atrial Structural Abnormalities, Remodeling, and Atrial Myopathy 1. Goette A, Kalman JM, Aguinaga L, et al. EHRA/HRS/APHRS/SOLAECE expert consensus  on atrial cardiomyopathies: definition, characterization, and clinical implication. Heart Rhythm.  2017;14:e3–e40. [PubMed: 27320515]  2. Rudolph V , Andrie RP, Rudolph TK, et al. Myeloperoxidase acts as a profibrotic mediator of atrial  fibrillation. Nat Med. 2010;16:470–474. [PubMed: 20305660]  3. Deroubaix E, Folliguet T, Rucker-Martin C, et al. Moderate and chronic hemodynamic overload  of sheep atria induces reversible cellular electrophysiologic abnormalities and atrial vulnerability. J  Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;44:1918–1926. [PubMed: 15519029]  2.3.2.1. Upstream Pathways 1. Purohit A, Rokita AG, Guan X, et al. Oxidized Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II  triggers atrial fibrillation. Circulation. 2013;128:1748–1757. [PubMed: 24030498]  et al. Page 153 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

2. Mesubi OO, Rokita AG, Abrol N, et al. Oxidized CaMKII and O-GlcNAcylation cause increased  atrial fibrillation in diabetic mice by distinct mechanisms. J Clin Invest. 2021;131:e95747.  [PubMed: 33151911]  3. Yan J, Zhao W, Thomson JK, et al. Stress signaling JNK2 crosstalk with CaMKII underlies  enhanced atrial arrhythmogenesis. Circ Res. 2018;122:821–835. [PubMed: 29352041]  4. Yan J, Bare DJ, DeSantiago J, et al. JNK2, a newly-identified SERCA2 enhancer, augments an  arrhythmic [Ca(2+)]SR leak-load relationship. Circ Res. 2021;128:455–470. [PubMed: 33334123]  5. Norlander AE, Madhur MS, Harrison DG. The immunology of hypertension. J Exp Med.  2018;215:21–33. [PubMed: 29247045]  6. Prinsen JK, Kannankeril PJ, Sidorova TN, et al. Highly reactive isolevuglandins promote atrial  fibrillation caused by hypertension. JACC Basic Transl Sci. 2020;5:602–615. [PubMed: 32613146]  7. Dobrev D, Dudley SC. Oxidative stress: a bystander or a causal contributor to atrial remodelling and  fibrillation? Cardiovasc Res. 2021;117:2291–2293. [PubMed: 33822005]  8. Watson T, Shantsila E, Lip GY . Mechanisms of thrombogenesis in atrial fibrillation: Virchow's triad  revisited. Lancet. 2009;373:155–166. [PubMed: 19135613]  9. Chung MK. Cardiac surgery: postoperative arrhythmias. Crit Care Med. 2000;28:N136–N144.  [PubMed: 11055682]  10. Chung MK, Martin DO, Sprecher D, et al. C-reactive protein elevation in patients with  atrial arrhythmias: inflammatory mechanisms and persistence of atrial fibrillation. Circulation.  2001;104:2886–2891. [PubMed: 11739301]  11. Yao C, Veleva T, Scott L Jr, et al. Enhanced cardiomyocyte NLRP3 inflammasome signaling  promotes atrial fibrillation. Circulation. 2018;138:2227–2242. [PubMed: 29802206]  2.3.3. Role of the Autonomic Nervous System 1. Chen PS, Chen LS, Fishbein MC, et al. Role of the autonomic nervous system in atrial fibrillation:  pathophysiology and therapy. Circ Res. 2014;114:1500–1515. [PubMed: 24763467]  2. Linz D, Elliott AD, Hohl M, et al. Role of autonomic nervous system in atrial fibrillation. Int J  Cardiol. 2019;287:181–188. [PubMed: 30497894]  3. Malik V , Mishima R, A DE, et al. The “road” to atrial fibrillation: the role of the cardiac autonomic  nervous system. J Atr Fibrillation. 2020;13:2400. [PubMed: 33024501]  4. Lau DH, Schotten U, Mahajan R, et al. Novel mechanisms in the pathogenesis of atrial fibrillation:  practical applications. Eur Heart J. 2016;37:1573–1581. [PubMed: 26578197]  5. Schotten U, Verheule S, Kirchhof P, et al. Pathophysiological mechanisms of atrial fibrillation: a  translational appraisal. Physiol Rev. 2011;91:265–325. [PubMed: 21248168]  6. Iwasaki YK, Nishida K, Kato T, et al. Atrial fibrillation pathophysiology: implications for  management. Circulation. 2011;124:2264–2274. [PubMed: 22083148]  7. Jayachandran JV , Sih HJ, Winkle W, et al. Atrial fibrillation produced by prolonged rapid atrial  pacing is associated with heterogeneous changes in atrial sympathetic innervation. Circulation.  2000;101:1185–1191. [PubMed: 10715267]  8. Chang CM, Wu TJ, Zhou S, et al. Nerve sprouting and sympathetic hyperinnervation in a canine  model of atrial fibrillation produced by prolonged right atrial pacing. Circulation. 2001;103:22–25.  [PubMed: 11136680]  9. Yu Y , Wei C, Liu L, et al. Atrial fibrillation increases sympathetic and parasympathetic neurons  in the intrinsic cardiac nervous system. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2014;37:1462–1469. [PubMed:  25053212]  10. Gussak G, Pfenniger A, Wren L, et al. Region-specific parasympathetic nerve remodeling in the  left atrium contributes to creation of a vulnerable substrate for atrial fibrillation. JCI Insight.  2019;4:e130532. [PubMed: 31503549]  11. Malik V , Elliott AD, Thomas G, et al. Autonomic afferent dysregulation in atrial fibrillation. JACC  Clin Electrophysiol. 2022;8:152–164. [PubMed: 35210071]  12. Malik V , McKitrick DJ, Lau DH, et al. Clinical evidence of autonomic dysfunction due to atrial  fibrillation: implications for rhythm control strategy. J Interv Card Electrophysiol. 2019;54:299– 307. [PubMed: 30661160]  et al. Page 154 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

13. Wasmund SL, Li JM, Page RL, et al. Effect of atrial fibrillation and an irregular ventricular  response on sympathetic nerve activity in human subjects. Circulation. 2003;107:2011–2015.  [PubMed: 12681998]  14. Mohanty PK, Arrowood JA, Ellenbogen KA, et al. Neurohumoral and hemodynamic effects of  lower body negative pressure in patients with congestive heart failure. Am Heart J. 1989;118:78– 85. [PubMed: 2662730]  15. De With RR, Marcos EG, Dudink E, et al. Atrial fibrillation progression risk factors and associated  cardiovascular outcome in well-phenotyped patients: data from the AF-RISK study. Europace.  2020;22:352–360. [PubMed: 31865391]  2.4. Genetics 1. Lubitz SA, Yin X, Fontes JD, et al. Association between familial atrial fibrillation and risk of  new-onset atrial fibrillation. JAMA. 2010;304:2263–2269. [PubMed: 21076174]  2. Brugada R, Tapscott T, Czernuszewicz GZ, et al. Identification of a genetic locus for familial atrial  fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 1997;336:905–911. [PubMed: 9070470]  3. Chen YH, Xu SJ, Bendahhou S, et al. KCNQ1 gain-of-function mutation in familial atrial  fibrillation. Science. 2003;299:251–254. [PubMed: 12522251]  4. Weng LC, Choi SH, Klarin D, et al. Heritability of atrial fibrillation. Circ Cardiovasc Genet.  2017;10:e001838. [PubMed: 29237688]  5. Roselli C, Chaffin MD, Weng LC, et al. Multi-ethnic genome-wide association study for atrial  fibrillation. Nat Genet. 2018;50:1225–1233. [PubMed: 29892015]  6. Low SK, Takahashi A, Ebana Y , et al. Identification of six new genetic loci associated with atrial  fibrillation in the Japanese population. Nat Genet. 2017;49:953–958. [PubMed: 28416822]  7. Lee JY , Kim TH, Yang PS, et al. Korean atrial fibrillation network genome-wide association study  for early-onset atrial fibrillation identifies novel susceptibility loci. Eur Heart J. 2017;38:2586– 2594. [PubMed: 28460022]  8. Choi SH, Jurgens SJ, Weng LC, et al. Monogenic and polygenic contributions to atrial fibrillation  risk: results from a national biobank. Circ Res. 2020;126:200–209. [PubMed: 31691645]  9. Yoneda ZT, Anderson KC, Quintana JA, et al. Early-onset atrial fibrillation and the prevalence  of rare variants in cardiomyopathy and arrhythmia genes. JAMA Cardiol. 2021;6:1371–1379.  [PubMed: 34495297]  10. Chalazan B, Mol D, Darbar FA, et al. Association of rare genetic variants and early-onset atrial  fibrillation in ethnic minority individuals. JAMA Cardiol. 2021;6:811–819. [PubMed: 33950154]  2.5. Addressing Health Inequities and Barriers to AF Management 1. Kim D, Yang PS, You SC, et al. Treatment timing and the effects of rhythm control strategy in  patients with atrial fibrillation: nationwide cohort study. BMJ. 2021;373:n991. [PubMed: 33975876]  2. Tamirisa KP, Al-Khatib SM, Mohanty S, et al. Racial and ethnic differences in the management of  atrial fibrillation. CJC Open. 2021;3:S137–S148. [PubMed: 34993443]  3. Lunde ED, Nielsen PB, Riahi S, et al. Associations between socioeconomic status, atrial fibrillation,  and outcomes: a systematic review. Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther. 2018;16:857–873. [PubMed:  30293472]  4. Hagengaard L, Andersen MP, Polcwiartek C, et al. Socioeconomic differences in outcomes  after hospital admission for atrial fibrillation or flutter. Eur Heart J Qual Care Clin Outcomes.  2021;7:295–303. [PubMed: 31560375]  5. Harrington RA, Califf RM, Balamurugan A, et al. Call to action: rural health: a presidential  advisory from the American Heart Association and American Stroke Association. Circulation.  2020;141:e615–e644. [PubMed: 32078375]  6. Thompson LE, Maddox TM, Lei L, et al. Sex differences in the use of oral anticoagulants for  atrial fibrillation: a report from the National Cardiovascular Data Registry (NCDR(®)) PINNACLE  registry. J Am Heart Assoc. 2017;6:e005801. [PubMed: 28724655]  et al. Page 155 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

7. Bhave PD, Lu X, Girotra S, et al. Race- and sex-related differences in care for patients newly  diagnosed with atrial fibrillation. Heart Rhythm. 2015;12:1406–1412. [PubMed: 25814418]  8. Avgil Tsadok M, Gagnon J, Joza J, et al. Temporal trends and sex differences in pulmonary  vein isolation for patients with atrial fibrillation. Heart Rhythm. 2015;12:1979–1986. [PubMed:  26096610]  9. Patel N, Deshmukh A, Thakkar B, et al. Gender, race, and health insurance status in patients  undergoing catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation. Am J Cardiol. 2016;117:1117–1126. [PubMed:  26899494]  10. Ugowe FE, Jackson LR 2nd, Thomas KL. Racial and ethnic differences in the prevalence,  management, and outcomes in patients with atrial fibrillation: a systematic review. Heart Rhythm.  2018;15:1337–1345. [PubMed: 29803022]  11. Benjamin EJ, Thomas KL, Go AS, et al. Transforming atrial fibrillation research to integrate social  determinants of health: a National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Workshop Report. JAMA  Cardiol. 2023;8:182–191. [PubMed: 36478155]  12. Gottlieb LM, Wing H, Adler NE. A systematic review of interventions on patients' social and  economic needs. Am J Prev Med. 2017;53:719–729. [PubMed: 28688725]  13. White-Williams C, Rossi LP, Bittner V A, et al. Addressing social determinants of health in the  care of patients with heart failure: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association.  Circulation. 2020;141:e841–e863. [PubMed: 32349541]  14. Davidson KW, Kemper AR, Doubeni CA, et al. Developing primary care-based recommendations  for social determinants of health: methods of the US Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern  Med. 2020;173:461–467. [PubMed: 32658576]  15. Davidson KW, Krist AH, Tseng CW, et al. Incorporation of social risk in US Preventive Services  Task Force recommendations and identification of key challenges for primary care. JAMA.  2021;326:1410–1415. [PubMed: 34468692]  16. V olgman AS, Benjamin EJ, Curtis AB, et al. Women and atrial fibrillation. J Cardiovasc  Electrophysiol. 2021;32:2793–2807. [PubMed: 33332669]  17. Russo AM, Zeitler EP, Giczewska A, et al. Association between sex and treatment outcomes  of atrial fibrillation ablation versus drug therapy: results from the CABANA trial. Circulation.  2021;143:661–672. [PubMed: 33499668]  18. Campbell ML, Larson J, Farid T, et al. Sex-based differences in procedural complications  associated with atrial fibrillation catheter ablation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J  Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2020;31:3176–3186. [PubMed: 32966681]  19. Kirchhof P, Camm AJ, Goette A, et al. Early rhythm-control therapy in patients with atrial  fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2020;383:1305–1316. [PubMed: 32865375]  20. Thomas KL, Al-Khalidi HR, Silverstein AP, et al. Ablation versus drug therapy for atrial  fibrillation in racial and ethnic minorities. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021;78:126–138. [PubMed:  34238436]  21. Abdel-Qadir H, Akioyamen LE, Fang J, et al. Association of neighborhood-level material  deprivation with atrial fibrillation care in a single-payer health care system: a population-based  cohort study. Circulation. 2022;146:159–171. [PubMed: 35678171]  22. Teppo K, Jaakkola J, Biancari F, et al. Association of income and educational levels with adherence  to direct oral anticoagulant therapy in patients with incident atrial fibrillation: a Finnish nationwide  cohort study. Pharmacol Res Perspect. 2022;10:e00961. [PubMed: 35599338]  23. O'Neal WT, Sandesara PB, Claxton JS, et al. Influence of sociodemographic factors and provider  specialty on anticoagulation prescription fill patterns and outcomes in atrial fibrillation. Am J  Cardiol. 2018;122:388–394. [PubMed: 29961563]  24. Eberly LA, Garg L, Yang L, et al. Racial/ethnic and socioeconomic disparities in management of  incident paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. JAMA Netw Open. 2021;4:e210247. [PubMed: 33635328]  25. Tertulien T, Chen Y , Althouse AD, et al. Association of income and educational attainment  in hospitalization events in atrial fibrillation. Am J Prev Cardiol. 2021;7:100201. [PubMed:  34611640]  26. LaRosa AR, Claxton J, O'Neal WT, et al. Association of household income and adverse outcomes  in patients with atrial fibrillation. Heart. 2020;106:1679–1685. [PubMed: 32144188]  et al. Page 156 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

27. Doshi R, Al-Khafaji JF, Dave M, et al. Comparison of baseline characteristics and in-hospital  outcomes in medicaid versus private insurance hospitalizations for atrial fibrillation. Am J Cardiol.  2019;123:776–781. [PubMed: 30558759]  3. Shared Decision-Making (SDM) in AF Management 1. Kunneman M, Branda ME, Hargraves IG, et al. Assessment of shared decision-making for stroke  prevention in patients with atrial fibrillation: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med.  2020;180:1215–1224. [PubMed: 32897386]  2. Wang PJ, Lu Y , Mahaffey KW, et al. A randomized clinical trial to evaluate an atrial fibrillation  stroke prevention shared decision-making pathway. J Am Heart Assoc. 2022;12:e8009. 3. Torres Roldan VD, Brand-McCarthy SR, Ponce OJ, et al. Shared decision making tools for people  facing stroke prevention strategies in atrial fibrillation: a systematic review and environmental scan.  Med Decis Making. 2021;41:540–549. [PubMed: 33896270]  4. Song D, Zhou J, Fan T, et al. Decision aids for shared decision-making and appropriate  anticoagulation therapy in patients with atrial fibrillation: a systematic review and meta-analysis.  Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2022;21:97–106. [PubMed: 34550376]  5. Chung MK, Fagerlin A, Wang PJ, et al. Shared decision making in cardiac electrophysiology  procedures and arrhythmia management. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2021;14:e007958.  [PubMed: 34865518]  6. Yen RW, Smith J, Engel J, et al. A systematic review and meta-analysis of patient decision aids for  socially disadvantaged populations: update from the International Patient Decision Aid Standards  (IDPAS). Med Decis Making. 2021;41:870–896. [PubMed: 34151614]  7. Noseworthy PA, Branda ME, Kunneman M, et al. Effect of shared decision-making for stroke  prevention on treatment adherence and safety outcomes in patients with atrial fibrillation: a  randomized clinical trial. J Am Heart Assoc. 2022;11:e023048. [PubMed: 35023356]  8. Aronis KN, Edgar B, Lin W, et al. Health literacy and atrial fibrillation: relevance and future  directions for patient-centred care. Eur Cardiol. 2017;12:52–57. [PubMed: 28936235]  9. Jones AE, McCarty MM, Brito JP, et al. Randomized evaluation of decision support interventions  for atrial fibrillation: rationale and design of the RED-AF study. Am Heart J. 2022;248:42–52.  [PubMed: 35218727]  10. Mark DB, Anstrom KJ, Sheng S, et al. Effect of catheter ablation vs medical therapy on quality  of life among patients with atrial fibrillation: the CABANA randomized clinical trial. JAMA.  2019;321:1275–1285. [PubMed: 30874716]  11. Kunneman M, Branda ME, Hargraves IG, et al. Assessment of shared decision-making for stroke  prevention in patients with atrial fibrillation: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med.  2020;180:1215–1224. [PubMed: 32897386]  4.1. Risk Stratification and Population Screening 1. Himmelreich JCL, Veelers L, Lucassen W AM, et al. Prediction models for atrial fibrillation  applicable in the community: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Europace. 2020;22:684–694.  [PubMed: 32011689]  2. Alonso A, Krijthe BP, Aspelund T, et al. Simple risk model predicts incidence of atrial fibrillation in  a racially and geographically diverse population: the CHARGE-AF consortium. J Am Heart Assoc.  2013;2:e000102. [PubMed: 23537808]  3. Li YG, Pastori D, Farcomeni A, et al. A simple clinical risk score (C2HEST) for predicting incident  atrial fibrillation in asian subjects: derivation in 471 446 Chinese subjects, with internal validation  and external application in 451 199 Korean subjects. Chest. 2019;155:510–518. [PubMed:  30292759]  4. Hu WS, Lin CL. Prediction of new-onset atrial fibrillation for general population in Asia: a  comparison of C2HEST and HATCH scores. Int J Cardiol. 2020;313:60–63. [PubMed: 32336574]  5. Biersteker TE, Schalij MJ, Treskes RW. Impact of mobile health devices for the detection of atrial  fibrillation: systematic review. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. 2021;9:e26161. [PubMed: 33908885]  et al. Page 157 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

6. Lin JY , Larson J, Schoenberg J, et al. Serial 7-day electrocardiogram patch screening for AF in  high-risk older women by the CHARGE-AF score. JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2022;8:1523–1534.  [PubMed: 36543503]  7. Noseworthy PA, Attia ZI, Behnken EM, et al. Artificial intelligence-guided screening for  atrial fibrillation using electrocardiogram during sinus rhythm: a prospective non-randomised  interventional trial. Lancet. 2022;400:1206–1212. [PubMed: 36179758]  8. Perez MV , Mahaffey KW, Hedlin H, et al. Large-scale assessment of a smartwatch to identify atrial  fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2019;381:1909–1917. [PubMed: 31722151]  9. Hlatky MA, Greenland P, Arnett DK, et al. Criteria for evaluation of novel markers of cardiovascular  risk: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2009;119:2408–2416.  [PubMed: 19364974]  10. Li Y , Pastori D, Guo Y , et al. Risk factors for new-onset atrial fibrillation: a focus on Asian  populations. Int J Cardiol. 2018;261:92–98. [PubMed: 29657061]  4.2.1. Basic Clinical Evaluation 1. Koyama J, Ray-Sequin PA, Falk RH. Longitudinal myocardial function assessed by tissue velocity,  strain, and strain rate tissue Doppler echocardiography in patients with AL (primary) cardiac  amyloidosis. Circulation. 2003;107:2446–2452. [PubMed: 12743000]  2. Reddy YNV , Obokata M, Verbrugge FH, et al. Atrial dysfunction in patients with heart failure with  preserved ejection fraction and atrial fibrillation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2020;76:1051–1064. [PubMed:  32854840]  3. Ma XX, Boldt LH, Zhang YL, et al. Clinical relevance of left atrial strain to predict recurrence of  atrial fibrillation after catheter ablation: a meta-analysis. Echocardiogr. 2016;33:724–733. 4. Costa FM, Ferreira AM, Oliveira S, et al. Left atrial volume is more important than the type of atrial  fibrillation in predicting the long-term success of catheter ablation. Int J Cardiol. 2015;184:56–61.  [PubMed: 25697871]  5. Shang W, Li L, Huang S, et al. Chronic kidney disease and the risk of new-onset atrial fibrillation: a  meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. PLoS One. 2016;11:e0155581. [PubMed: 27175779]  6. Minhas AM, Usman MS, Khan MS, et al. Link between non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and atrial  fibrillation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Cureus. 2017;9:e1142. [PubMed: 28484681]  7. Frost L, Vestergaard P, Mosekilde L. Hyperthyroidism and risk of atrial fibrillation or flutter: a  population-based study. Arch Intern Med. 2004;164:1675–1678. [PubMed: 15302638]  8. Askew JW, Miller TD, Hodge DO, et al. The value of myocardial perfusion single-photon emission  computed tomography in screening asymptomatic patients with atrial fibrillation for coronary artery  disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;50:1080–1085. [PubMed: 17825719]  9. Cremer PC, Mentias A, Newton D, et al. Low yield of myocardial perfusion imaging in  asymptomatic patients with atrial fibrillation. JAMA Intern Med. 2015;175:1854–1855. [PubMed:  26367850]  10. Gex G, Gerstel E, Righini M, et al. Is atrial fibrillation associated with pulmonary embolism? J  Thromb Haemost. 2012;10:347–351. [PubMed: 22212132]  11. Delgado V , Di Biase L, Leung M, et al. Structure and function of the left atrium and left  atrial appendage: AF and stroke implications. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;70:3157–3172. [PubMed:  29268928]  12. Klein I, Danzi S. Thyroid disease and the heart. Circulation. 2007;116:1725–1735. [PubMed:  17923583]  4.2.2. Rhythm Monitoring Tools and Methods 1. Yang TY , Huang L, Malwade S, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of ambulatory devices in detecting atrial  fibrillation: systematic review and meta-analysis. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. 2021;9:e26167. [PubMed:  33835039]  et al. Page 158 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

2. Prasitlumkum N, Cheungpasitporn W, Chokesuwattanaskul A, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of smart  gadgets/wearable devices in detecting atrial fibrillation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Arch  Cardiovasc Dis. 2021;114:4–16. [PubMed: 32921618]  3. Wong KC, Klimis H, Lowres N, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of handheld electrocardiogram devices in  detecting atrial fibrillation in adults in community versus hospital settings: a systematic review and  meta-analysis. Heart. 2020;106:1211–1217. [PubMed: 32393588]  4. Kapa S, Epstein AE, Callans DJ, et al. Assessing arrhythmia burden after catheter ablation of atrial  fibrillation using an implantable loop recorder: the ABACUS study. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol.  2013;24:875–881. [PubMed: 23577826]  5. Podd SJ, Sugihara C, Furniss SS, et al. Are implantable cardiac monitors the 'gold standard' for  atrial fibrillation detection? A prospective randomized trial comparing atrial fibrillation monitoring  using implantable cardiac monitors and DDDRP permanent pacemakers in post atrial fibrillation  ablation patients. Europace. 2016;18:1000–1005. [PubMed: 26585596]  6. de V oogt WG, van Hemel NM, van de Bos AA, et al. Verification of pacemaker automatic  mode switching for the detection of atrial fibrillation and atrial tachycardia with Holter recording.  Europace. 2006;8:950–961. [PubMed: 17043069]  7. Eysenck W, Freemantle N, Sulke N. A randomized trial evaluating the accuracy of AF detection by  four external ambulatory ECG monitors compared to permanent pacemaker AF detection. J Interv  Card Electrophysiol. 2020;57:361–369. [PubMed: 30741360]  8. Vitolo M, Imberti JF, Maisano A, et al. Device-detected atrial high rate episodes and the risk of  stroke/thrombo-embolism and atrial fibrillation incidence: a systematic review and meta-analysis.  Eur J Intern Med. 2021;92:100–106. [PubMed: 34154879]  9. Healey JS, Connolly SJ, Gold MR, et al. Subclinical atrial fibrillation and the risk of stroke. N Engl  J Med. 2012;366:120–129. [PubMed: 22236222]  10. Buck BH, Hill MD, Quinn FR, et al. Effect of implantable vs prolonged external  electrocardiographic monitoring on atrial fibrillation detection in patients with ischemic stroke:  the PER DIEM randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2021;325:2160–2168. [PubMed: 34061146]  11. Bernstein RA, Kamel H, Granger CB, et al. Effect of long-term continuous cardiac monitoring  vs usual care on detection of atrial fibrillation in patients with stroke attributed to large- or  small-vessel disease: the STROKE-AF randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2021;325:2169–2177.  [PubMed: 34061145]  12. Hannun AY , Rajpurkar P, Haghpanahi M, et al. Cardiologist-level arrhythmia detection  and classification in ambulatory electrocardiograms using a deep neural network. Nat Med.  2019;25:65–69. [PubMed: 30617320]  13. Goldenthal IL, Sciacca RR, Riga T, et al. Recurrent atrial fibrillation/flutter detection after  ablation or cardioversion using the AliveCor KardiaMobile device: iHEART results. J Cardiovasc  Electrophysiol. 2019;30:2220–2228. [PubMed: 31507001]  14. Gill S, Bunting KV , Sartini C, et al. Smartphone detection of atrial fibrillation using  photoplethysmography: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Heart. 2022;108:1600–1607.  [PubMed: 35277454]  15. Tison GH, Sanchez JM, Ballinger B, et al. Passive detection of atrial fibrillation using a  commercially available smartwatch. JAMA Cardiol. 2018;3:409–416. [PubMed: 29562087]  16. Perez MV , Mahaffey KW, Hedlin H, et al. Large-scale assessment of a smartwatch to identify atrial  fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2019;381:1909–1917. [PubMed: 31722151]  17. Guo Y , Wang H, Zhang H, et al. Mobile Photoplethysmographic technology to detect atrial  fibrillation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;74:2365–2375. [PubMed: 31487545]  18. Avram R, Ramsis M, Cristal AD, et al. Validation of an algorithm for continuous monitoring  of atrial fibrillation using a consumer smartwatch. Heart Rhythm. 2021;18:1482–1490. [PubMed:  33838317]  19. Dussault C, Toeg H, Nathan M, et al. Electrocardiographic monitoring for detecting atrial  fibrillation after ischemic stroke or transient ischemic attack: systematic review and meta-analysis.  Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2015;8:263–269. [PubMed: 25639643]  20. Caceres BA, Hickey KT, Bakken SB, et al. Mobile electrocardiogram monitoring and healthrelated quality of life in patients with atrial fibrillation: findings from the iPhone Helping  et al. Page 159 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Evaluate Atrial Fibrillation Rhythm Through Technology (iHEART) study. J Cardiovasc Nurs.  2020;35:327–336. [PubMed: 32015256]  5.1. Primary Prevention 1. Tedrow UB, Conen D, Ridker PM, et al. The long- and short-term impact of elevated body mass  index on the risk of new atrial fibrillation the WHS (women's health study). J Am Coll Cardiol.  2010;55:2319–2327. [PubMed: 20488302]  2. Elliott AD, Linz D, Mishima R, et al. Association between physical activity and risk of  incident arrhythmias in 402 406 individuals: evidence from the UK Biobank cohort. Eur Heart  J. 2020;41:1479–1486. [PubMed: 31951255]  3. Gallagher C, Hendriks JML, Elliott AD, et al. Alcohol and incident atrial fibrillation - a systematic  review and meta-analysis. Int J Cardiol. 2017;246:46–52. [PubMed: 28867013]  4. Aune D, Schlesinger S, Norat T, et al. Tobacco smoking and the risk of atrial fibrillation: a  systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective studies. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2018;25:1437–1451.  [PubMed: 29996680]  5. Aune D, Feng T, Schlesinger S, et al. Diabetes mellitus, blood glucose and the risk of atrial  fibrillation: a systematic review and meta-analysis of cohort studies. J Diabetes Complications.  2018;32:501–511. [PubMed: 29653902]  6. Soliman EZ, Rahman AF, Zhang ZM, et al. Effect of intensive blood pressure lowering on the risk  of atrial fibrillation. Hypertension. 2020;75:1491–1496. [PubMed: 32362229]  7. Alonso A, Krijthe BP, Aspelund T, et al. Simple risk model predicts incidence of atrial fibrillation in  a racially and geographically diverse population: the CHARGE-AF consortium. J Am Heart Assoc.  2013;2:e000102. [PubMed: 23537808]  8. Himmelreich JCL, Veelers L, Lucassen W AM, et al. Prediction models for atrial fibrillation  applicable in the community: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Europace. 2020;22:684–694.  [PubMed: 32011689]  9. Roselli C, Chaffin MD, Weng LC, et al. Multi-ethnic genome-wide association study for atrial  fibrillation. Nat Genet. 2018;50:1225–1233. [PubMed: 29892015]  10. Huxley RR, Lopez FL, Folsom AR, et al. Absolute and attributable risks of atrial fibrillation in  relation to optimal and borderline risk factors: the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC)  study. Circulation. 2011;123:1501–1508. [PubMed: 21444879]  11. Garg PK, O'Neal WT, Ogunsua A, et al. Usefulness of the American Heart Association's  Life Simple 7 to predict the risk of atrial fibrillation (from the REasons for Geographic And  Racial Differences in Stroke [REGARDS] study). Am J Cardiol. 2018;121:199–204. [PubMed:  29153246]  12. Di Benedetto L, Michels G, Luben R, et al. Individual and combined impact of lifestyle factors on  atrial fibrillation in apparently healthy men and women: the EPIC-Norfolk prospective population  study. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2018;25:1374–1383. [PubMed: 29863403]  13. Arnett DK, Blumenthal RS, Albert MA, et al. 2019 ACC/AHA guideline on the primary  prevention of cardiovascular disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American  Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2019;140:e596–e646.  [PubMed: 30879355]  14. Lin AL, Nah G, Tang JJ, et al. Cannabis, cocaine, methamphetamine, and opiates increase the risk  of incident atrial fibrillation. Eur Heart J. 2022;43:4933–4942. [PubMed: 36257330]  15. Mishima RS, Verdicchio CV , Noubiap JJ, et al. Self-reported physical activity and atrial  fibrillation risk: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Heart Rhythm. 2021;18:520–528.  [PubMed: 33348059]  16. Jin MN, Yang PS, Song C, et al. Physical activity and risk of atrial fibrillation: a nationwide cohort  study in general population. Sci Rep. 2019;9:13270. [PubMed: 31519947]  17. Khurshid S, Weng LC, Al-Alusi MA, et al. Accelerometer-derived physical activity and risk of  atrial fibrillation. Eur Heart J. 2021;42:2472–2483. [PubMed: 34037209]  et al. Page 160 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

18. Tikkanen E, Gustafsson S, Ingelsson E. Associations of fitness, physical activity, strength,  and genetic risk with cardiovascular disease: longitudinal analyses in the UK Biobank study.  Circulation. 2018;137:2583–2591. [PubMed: 29632216]  19. Qureshi WT, Alirhayim Z, Blaha MJ, et al. Cardiorespiratory fitness and risk of incident atrial  fibrillation results from the Henry Ford exercise testing (FIT) project. Circulation. 2015;131:1827– 1834. [PubMed: 25904645]  20. Khan H, Kella D, Rauramaa R, et al. Cardiorespiratory fitness and atrial fibrillation: a populationbased follow-up study. Heart Rhythm. 2015;12:1424–1430. [PubMed: 25778429]  21. Andersen K, Farahmand B, Ahlbom A, et al. Risk of arrhythmias in 52 755 long-distance crosscountry skiers: a cohort study. Eur Heart J. 2013;34:3624–3631. [PubMed: 23756332]  22. Baldesberger S, Bauersfeld U, Candinas R, et al. Sinus node disease and arrhythmias in the longterm follow-up of former professional cyclists. Eur Heart J. 2008;29:71–78. [PubMed: 18065754]  23. Newman W, Parry-Williams G, Wiles J, et al. Risk of atrial fibrillation in athletes: a systematic  review and meta-analysis. Br J Sports Med. 2021;55:1233–1238. [PubMed: 34253538]  24. Morseth B, Graff-Iversen S, Jacobsen BK, et al. Physical activity, resting heart rate, and atrial  fibrillation: the Tromsø study. Eur Heart J. 2016;37:2307–2313. [PubMed: 26966149]  25. Marcus GM, Vittinghoff E, Whitman IR, et al. Acute consumption of alcohol and discrete atrial  fibrillation events. Ann Intern Med. 2021;174:1503–1509. [PubMed: 34461028]  26. V oskoboinik A, McDonald C, Chieng D, et al. Acute electrical, autonomic and structural effects  of binge drinking: insights into the 'holiday heart syndrome'. Int J Cardiol. 2021;331:100–105.  [PubMed: 33548379]  27. Whitman IR, Agarwal V , Nah G, et al. Alcohol abuse and cardiac disease. J Am Coll Cardiol.  2017;69:13–24. [PubMed: 28057245]  28. Csengeri D, Sprunker NA, Di Castelnuovo A, et al. Alcohol consumption, cardiac biomarkers,  and risk of atrial fibrillation and adverse outcomes. Eur Heart J. 2021;42:1170–1177. [PubMed:  33438022]  29. Tu SJ, Gallagher C, Elliott AD, et al. Risk Thresholds for total and beverage-specific alcohol  consumption and incident atrial fibrillation. JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2021;7:1561–1569.  [PubMed: 34330672]  30. Zuo H, Nygard O, V ollset SE, et al. Smoking, plasma cotinine and risk of atrial fibrillation: the  Hordaland Health Study. J Intern Med. 2018;283:73–82. [PubMed: 28940460]  31. Lu Y , Guo Y , Lin H, et al. Genetically determined tobacco and alcohol use and risk of atrial  fibrillation. BMC Med Genomics. 2021;14:73. [PubMed: 33750369]  32. Larsson SC, Wallin A, Hakansson N, et al. Type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus and incidence of  seven cardiovascular diseases. Int J Cardiol. 2018;262:66–70. [PubMed: 29605469]  33. Qi W, Zhang N, Korantzopoulos P, et al. Serum glycated hemoglobin level as a predictor  of atrial fibrillation: a systematic review with meta-analysis and meta-regression. PLoS One.  2017;12:e0170955. [PubMed: 28267752]  5.2.1. Weight Loss in Individuals Who Are Overweight or Obese 1. Abed HS, Wittert GA, Leong DP, et al. Effect of weight reduction and cardiometabolic risk factor  management on symptom burden and severity in patients with atrial fibrillation: a randomized  clinical trial. JAMA. 2013;310:2050–2060. [PubMed: 24240932]  2. Pathak RK, Middeldorp ME, Meredith M, et al. Long-term effect of goal-directed weight  management in an atrial fibrillation cohort: a long-term follow-up study (LEGACY). J Am Coll  Cardiol. 2015;65:2159–2169. [PubMed: 25792361]  3. Pathak RK, Middeldorp ME, Lau DH, et al. Aggressive risk factor reduction study for atrial  fibrillation and implications for the outcome of ablation: the ARREST-AF cohort study. J Am Coll  Cardiol. 2014;64:2222–2231. [PubMed: 25456757]  4. Middeldorp ME, Pathak RK, Meredith M, et al. PREVEntion and regReSsive Effect of weightloss and risk factor modification on Atrial Fibrillation: the REVERSE-AF study. Europace.  2018;20:1929–1935. [PubMed: 29912366]  et al. Page 161 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

5. Wong CX, Sullivan T, Sun MT, et al. Obesity and the risk of incident, postoperative, and  post-ablation atrial fibrillation: a meta-analysis of 626 603 individuals in 51 studies. JACC: Clin  Electrophysiol. 2015;1:139–152. [PubMed: 29759357]  6. Abed HS, Samuel CS, Lau DH, et al. Obesity results in progressive atrial structural and  electrical remodeling: implications for atrial fibrillation. Heart Rhythm. 2013;10:90–100. [PubMed:  23063864]  7. Mahajan R, Lau DH, Brooks AG, et al. Electrophysiological, electroanatomical, and structural  remodeling of the atria as consequences of sustained obesity. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;66:1–11.  [PubMed: 26139051]  8. Mahajan R, Lau DH, Brooks AG, et al. Atrial fibrillation and obesity: reverse remodeling of atrial  substrate with weight reduction. JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2021;7:630–641. [PubMed: 33640353]  9. Grundvold I, Bodegard J, Nilsson PM, et al. Body weight and risk of atrial fibrillation in 7  169 patients with newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes; an observational study. Cardiovasc Diabetol.  2015;14:5. [PubMed: 25589001]  10. Di Benedetto L, Michels G, Luben R, et al. Individual and combined impact of lifestyle factors on  atrial fibrillation in apparently healthy men and women: the EPIC-Norfolk prospective population  study. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2018;25:1374–1383. [PubMed: 29863403]  11. Providência R, Adrag ão P, de Asmundis C, et al. Impact of body mass index on the outcomes  of catheter ablation of atrial fibrillation: a European observational multicenter study. J Am Heart  Assoc. 2019;8:e012253. [PubMed: 31581876]  12. Glover BM, Hong KL, Dagres N, et al. Impact of body mass index on the outcome of catheter  ablation of atrial fibrillation. Heart. 2019;105:244–250. [PubMed: 30279268]  13. Donnellan E, Wazni O, Kanj M, et al. Outcomes of atrial fibrillation ablation in morbidly  obese patients following bariatric surgery compared with a nonobese cohort. Circ Arrhythm  Electrophysiol. 2019;12:e007598. [PubMed: 31610693]  14. Donnellan E, Wazni OM, Kanj M, et al. Association between pre-ablation bariatric surgery and  atrial fibrillation recurrence in morbidly obese patients undergoing atrial fibrillation ablation.  Europace. 2019;21:1476–1483. [PubMed: 31304532]  15. Donnellan E, Wazni OM, Elshazly M, et al. Impact of bariatric surgery on atrial fibrillation type.  Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2020;13:e007626. [PubMed: 31940441]  16. Donnellan E, Wazni OM, Kanj M, et al. Impact of risk-factor modification on arrhythmia  recurrence among morbidly obese patients undergoing atrial fibrillation ablation. J Cardiovasc  Electrophysiol. 2020;31:1979–1986. [PubMed: 32510749]  17. Mohanty S, Mohanty P, Natale V , et al. Impact of weight loss on ablation outcome in obese  patients with longstanding persistent atrial fibrillation. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2018;29:246– 253. [PubMed: 29171116]  5.2.2. Physical Fitness 1. Hegbom F, Stavem K, Sire S, et al. Effects of short-term exercise training on symptoms and  quality of life in patients with chronic atrial fibrillation. Int J Cardiol. 2007;116:86–92. [PubMed:  16815571]  2. Malmo V , Nes BM, Amundsen BH, et al. Aerobic interval training reduces the burden of  atrial fibrillation in the short term: a randomized trial. Circulation. 2016;133:466–473. [PubMed:  26733609]  3. Elliott AD, Verdicchio CV , Mahajan R, et al. An exercise and physical activity program in patients  with atrial fibrillation: the ACTIVE-AF randomized controlled trial. JACC Clin Electrophysiol.  2023;9:455–465. [PubMed: 36752479]  4. Pathak RK, Elliott A, Middeldorp ME, et al. Impact of CARDIOrespiratory FITness on arrhythmia  recurrence in obese individuals with atrial fibrillation: the CARDIO-FIT study. J Am Coll Cardiol.  2015;66:985–996. [PubMed: 26113406]  5. Oesterle A, Giancaterino S, Van Noord MG, et al. Effects of supervised exercise training on  atrial fibrillation: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev.  2022;42:258–265. [PubMed: 35235540]  et al. Page 162 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

6. Osbak PS, Mourier M, Kjaer A, et al. A randomized study of the effects of exercise training on  patients with atrial fibrillation. Am Heart J. 2011;162:1080–1087. [PubMed: 22137082]  7. Ahn HJ, Lee SR, Choi EK, et al. Association between exercise habits and stroke, heart failure, and  mortality in Korean patients with incident atrial fibrillation: a nationwide population-based cohort  study. PLoS Med. 2021;18:e1003659. [PubMed: 34101730]  8. Skielboe AK, Bandholm TQ, Hakmann S, et al. Cardiovascular exercise and burden of arrhythmia  in patients with atrial fibrillation - a randomized controlled trial. PLoS One. 2017;12:e0170060.  [PubMed: 28231325]  9. Abdulla J, Nielsen JR. Is the risk of atrial fibrillation higher in athletes than in the general  population? A systematic review and meta-analysis. Europace. 2009;11:1156–1159. [PubMed:  19633305]  10. Andersen K, Farahmand B, Ahlbom A, et al. Risk of arrhythmias in 52 755 long-distance crosscountry skiers: a cohort study. Eur Heart J. 2013;34:3624–3631. [PubMed: 23756332]  11. Smart NA, King N, Lambert JD, et al. Exercise-based cardiac rehabilitation improves exercise  capacity and health-related quality of life in people with atrial fibrillation: a systematic review and  meta-analysis of randomised and non-randomised trials. Open Heart. 2018;5:e000880. [PubMed:  30613410]  12. Risom SS, Zwisler AD, Rasmussen TB, et al. Cardiac rehabilitation versus usual care for patients  treated with catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation: results of the randomized CopenHeartRFA trial.  Am Heart J. 2016;181:120–129. [PubMed: 27823683]  13. Kato M, Ogano M, Mori Y , et al. Exercise-based cardiac rehabilitation for patients with catheter  ablation for persistent atrial fibrillation: a randomized controlled clinical trial. Eur J Prev Cardiol.  2019;26:1931–1940. [PubMed: 31272205]  14. Luo N, Merrill P, Parikh KS, et al. Exercise Training in patients with chronic heart failure and atrial  fibrillation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;69:1683–1691. [PubMed: 28359513]  15. Buckley BJR, Harrison SL, Fazio-Eynullayeva E, et al. Exercise-based cardiac rehabilitation and  all-cause mortality among patients with atrial fibrillation. J Am Heart Assoc. 2021;10:e020804.  [PubMed: 34096332]  5.2.3. Smoking Cessation 1. Arnett DK, Blumenthal RS, Albert MA, et al. 2019 ACC/AHA guideline on the primary  prevention of cardiovascular disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American  Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2019;140:e596–e646.  [PubMed: 30879355]  2. Patnode CD, Henderson JT, Thompson JH, et al. Behavioral counseling and pharmacotherapy  interventions for tobacco cessation in adults, including pregnant women: a review of reviews for the  US Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2015;163:608–621. [PubMed: 26389650]  3. Choi S, Chang J, Kim K, et al. Association of smoking cessation after atrial fibrillation diagnosis  on the risk of cardiovascular disease: a cohort study of South Korean men. BMC Public Health.  2020;20:168. [PubMed: 32013964]  4. Benz AP, Healey JS, Chin A, et al. Stroke risk prediction in patients with atrial fibrillation with and  without rheumatic heart disease. Cardiovasc Res. 2022;118:295–304. [PubMed: 33386845]  5. Chatterjee NA, Chae CU, Kim E, et al. Modifiable risk factors for incident heart failure in atrial  fibrillation. JACC Heart Fail. 2017;5:552–560. [PubMed: 28624486]  6. Chamberlain AM, Alonso A, Gersh BJ, et al. Multimorbidity and the risk of hospitalization and  death in atrial fibrillation: a population-based study. Am Heart J. 2017;185:74–84. [PubMed:  28267478]  7. Sardana M, Tang Y , Magnani JW, et al. Provider-level variation in smoking cessation assistance  provided in the cardiology clinics: insights from the NCDR PINNACLE registry. J Am Heart Assoc.  2019;8:e011412. 8. Huang Y , Britton J, Hubbard R, et al. Who receives prescriptions for smoking cessation  medications? An association rule mining analysis using a large primary care database. Tob Control.  2013;22:274–279. [PubMed: 22246781]  et al. Page 163 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

9. Stead LF, Buitrago D, Preciado N, et al. Physician advice for smoking cessation. Cochrane Database  Syst Rev. 2013;5:CD000165. 10. Hartmann-Boyce J, Livingstone-Banks J, Ordonez-Mena JM, et al. Behavioural interventions  for smoking cessation: an overview and network meta-analysis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.  2021;1:CD013229. [PubMed: 33411338]  11. Suissa K, Lariviere J, Eisenberg MJ, et al. Efficacy and safety of smoking cessation interventions  in patients with cardiovascular disease: a network meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.  Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2017;10:e002458. [PubMed: 28093398]  12. Buiatti A, Kaess B, Reents T, et al. Catheter ablation for “lone” atrial fibrillation: efficacy and  predictors of recurrence. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2016;27:536–541. [PubMed: 26799683]  13. Cheng WH, Lo LW, Lin YJ, et al. Cigarette smoking causes a worse long-term outcome in  persistent atrial fibrillation following catheter ablation. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2018;29:699– 706. [PubMed: 29424013]  14. Apostolakis S, Sullivan RM, Olshansky B, et al. Factors affecting quality of anticoagulation  control among patients with atrial fibrillation on warfarin: the SAMe-TT(2)R(2) score. Chest.  2013;144:1555–1563. [PubMed: 23669885]  15. Albertsen IE, Rasmussen LH, Lane DA, et al. The impact of smoking on thromboembolism and  mortality in patients with incident atrial fibrillation: insights from the Danish Diet, Cancer, and  Health study. Chest. 2014;145:559–566. [PubMed: 24091709]  16. Lee SR, Choi EK, Jung JH, et al. Smoking cessation after diagnosis of new-onset atrial fibrillation  and the risk of stroke and death. J Clin Med. 2021;10:2238. [PubMed: 34064089]  5.2.4. Alcohol Consumption 1. V oskoboinik A, Kalman JM, De Silva A, et al. Alcohol abstinence in drinkers with atrial fibrillation.  N Engl J Med. 2020;382:20–28. [PubMed: 31893513]  2. Marcus GM, Dukes JW, Vittinghoff E, et al. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial  of intravenous alcohol to assess changes in atrial electrophysiology. JACC Clin Electrophysiol.  2021;7:662–670. [PubMed: 33516710]  3. Marcus GM, Modrow MF, Schmid CH, et al. Individualized studies of triggers of paroxysmal atrial  fibrillation: the I-STOP-AFib randomized clinical trial. JAMA Cardiol. 2022;7:167–174. [PubMed:  34775507]  4. Marcus GM, Vittinghoff E, Whitman IR, et al. Acute consumption of alcohol and discrete atrial  fibrillation events. Ann Intern Med. 2021;174:1503–1509. [PubMed: 34461028]  5. Abed HS, Wittert GA, Leong DP, et al. Effect of weight reduction and cardiometabolic risk factor  management on symptom burden and severity in patients with atrial fibrillation: a randomized  clinical trial. JAMA. 2013;310:2050–2060. [PubMed: 24240932]  6. Pathak RK, Middeldorp ME, Lau DH, et al. Aggressive risk factor reduction study for atrial  fibrillation and implications for the outcome of ablation: the ARREST-AF cohort study. J Am Coll  Cardiol. 2014;64:2222–2231. [PubMed: 25456757]  7. Pathak RK, Middeldorp ME, Meredith M, et al. Long-term effect of goal-directed weight  management in an atrial fibrillation cohort: a long-term follow-up study (LEGACY). J Am Coll  Cardiol. 2015;65:2159–2169. [PubMed: 25792361]  8. Middeldorp ME, Pathak RK, Meredith M, et al. PREVEntion and regReSsive Effect of weightloss and risk factor modification on Atrial Fibrillation: the REVERSE-AF study. Europace.  2018;20:1929–1935. [PubMed: 29912366]  5.2.5. Caffeine Consumption 1. Lagier D, Nee L, Guieu R, et al. Peri-operative oral caffeine does not prevent postoperative atrial  fibrillation after heart valve surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass: a randomised controlled clinical  trial. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2018;35:911–918. [PubMed: 29702502]  et al. Page 164 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

2. Marcus GM, Modrow MF, Schmid CH, et al. Individualized Studies of triggers of paroxysmal atrial  fibrillation: the I-STOP-AFib randomized clinical trial. JAMA Cardiol. 2022;7:167–174. [PubMed:  34775507]  3. Caldeira D, Martins C, Alves LB, et al. Caffeine does not increase the risk of atrial fibrillation: a  systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. Heart. 2013;99:1383–1389. [PubMed:  24009307]  4. Conen D, Chiuve SE, Everett BM, et al. Caffeine consumption and incident atrial fibrillation in  women. Am J Clin Nutr. 2010;92:509–514. [PubMed: 20573799]  5. Bazal P, Gea A, Navarro AM, et al. Caffeinated coffee consumption and risk of atrial fibrillation in  two Spanish cohorts. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2021;28:648–657. [PubMed: 34021573]  6. Larsson SC, Drca N, Jensen-Urstad M, et al. Coffee consumption is not associated with increased  risk of atrial fibrillation: results from two prospective cohorts and a meta-analysis. BMC Med.  2015;13:207. [PubMed: 26394673]  7. Cheng M, Hu Z, Lu X, et al. Caffeine intake and atrial fibrillation incidence: dose response  meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. Can J Cardiol. 2014;30:448–454. [PubMed: 24680173]  8. Kim EJ, Hoffmann TJ, Nah G, et al. Coffee consumption and incident tachyarrhythmias: reported  behavior, Mendelian randomization, and their interactions. JAMA Intern Med. 2021;181:1185– 1193. [PubMed: 34279564]  9. Bodar V , Chen J, Gaziano JM, et al. Coffee consumption and risk of atrial fibrillation in the  physicians' health study. J Am Heart Assoc. 2019;8:e011346. [PubMed: 31378120]  10. Groh CA, Faulkner M, Getabecha S, et al. Patient-reported triggers of paroxysmal atrial  fibrillation. Heart Rhythm. 2019;16:996–1002. [PubMed: 30772533]  11. Yuan S, Larsson SC. No association between coffee consumption and risk of atrial fibrillation:  a Mendelian randomization study. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2019;29:1185–1188. [PubMed:  31558414]  12. Mattioli A V , Pennella S, Farinetti A, et al. Energy drinks and atrial fibrillation in young adults. Clin  Nutr. 2018;37:1073–1074. [PubMed: 28527645]  13. Di Rocco JR, During A, Morelli PJ, et al. Atrial fibrillation in healthy adolescents after highly  caffeinated beverage consumption: two case reports. J Med Case Rep. 2011;5:18. [PubMed:  21247417]  14. Mattioli A V , Bonatti S, Zennaro M, et al. Effect of coffee consumption, lifestyle and acute  life stress in the development of acute lone atrial fibrillation. J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown).  2008;9:794–798. [PubMed: 18607243]  5.2.6. Diet and Dietary Supplementation 1. Aleksova A, Masson S, Maggioni AP, et al. n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids and atrial fibrillation  in patients with chronic heart failure: the GISSI-HF trial. Eur J Heart Fail. 2013;15:1289–1295.  [PubMed: 23839902]  2. Metcalf RG, Skuladottir GV , Indridason OS, et al. U-shaped relationship between tissue  docosahexaenoic acid and atrial fibrillation following cardiac surgery. Eur J Clin Nutr.  2014;68:114–118. [PubMed: 24169465]  3. Gencer B, Djousse L, Al-Ramady OT, et al. Effect of long-term marine omega-3 fatty acids  supplementation on the risk of atrial fibrillation in randomized controlled trials of cardiovascular  outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Circulation. 2021;144:1981–1990. [PubMed:  34612056]  4. Darghosian L, Free M, Li J, et al. Effect of omega-three polyunsaturated fatty acids on  inflammation, oxidative stress, and recurrence of atrial fibrillation. Am J Cardiol. 2015;115:196– 201. [PubMed: 25465932]  5. Kowey PR, Reiffel JA, Ellenbogen KA, et al. Efficacy and safety of prescription omega-3 fatty acids  for the prevention of recurrent symptomatic atrial fibrillation: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA.  2010;304:2363–2372. [PubMed: 21078810]  6. Nigam A, Talajic M, Roy D, et al. Fish oil for the reduction of atrial fibrillation recurrence,  inflammation, and oxidative stress. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:1441–1448. [PubMed: 25277614]  et al. Page 165 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

7. Kumar S, Sutherland F, Stevenson I, et al. Effects of long-term ω-3 polyunsaturated fatty  acid supplementation on paroxysmal atrial tachyarrhythmia burden in patients with implanted  pacemakers: results from a prospective randomised study. Int J Cardiol. 2013;168:3812–3817.  [PubMed: 23890856]  8. Albert CM, Cook NR, Pester J, et al. Effect of marine omega-3 fatty acid and vitamin D  supplementation on incident atrial fibrillation: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2021;325:1061– 1073. [PubMed: 33724323]  9. Huang WL, Yang J, Yang J, et al. Vitamin D and new-onset atrial fibrillation: a meta-analysis of  randomized controlled trials. Hellenic J Cardiol. 2018;59:72–77. [PubMed: 29154815]  10. Kara H, Yasim A. Effects of high-dose vitamin D supplementation on the occurrence of postoperative atrial fibrillation after coronary artery bypass grafting: randomized controlled trial. Gen  Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2020;68:477–484. [PubMed: 31559589]  11. Shi R, Li ZH, Chen D, et al. Sole and combined vitamin C supplementation can prevent  postoperative atrial fibrillation after cardiac surgery: a systematic review and meta-analysis of  randomized controlled trials. Clin Cardiol. 2018;41:871–878. [PubMed: 29603289]  12. Abed HS, Wittert GA, Leong DP, et al. Effect of weight reduction and cardiometabolic risk factor  management on symptom burden and severity in patients with atrial fibrillation: a randomized  clinical trial. JAMA. 2013;310:2050–2060. [PubMed: 24240932]  13. Pathak RK, Middeldorp ME, Meredith M, et al. Long-term effect of goal-directed weight  management in an atrial fibrillation cohort: a long-term follow-up study (LEGACY). J Am Coll  Cardiol. 2015;65:2159–2169. [PubMed: 25792361]  14. Zhang S, Zhuang X, Lin X, et al. Low-carbohydrate diets and risk of incident atrial fibrillation: a  prospective cohort study. J Am Heart Assoc. 2019;8:e011955. [PubMed: 31020911]  5.2.7. Diabetes 1. Echouffo-Tcheugui JB, Shrader P, Thomas L, et al. Care patterns and outcomes in atrial fibrillation  patients with and without diabetes: ORBIT-AF registry. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;70:1325–1335.  [PubMed: 28882229]  2. Patti G, Di Gioia G, Cavallari I, et al. Safety and efficacy of nonvitamin K antagonist oral  anticoagulants versus warfarin in diabetic patients with atrial fibrillation: a study-level meta-analysis  of phase III randomized trials. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2017;33:e2876. 3. Donnellan E, Aagaard P, Kanj M, et al. Association between pre-ablation glycemic control  and outcomes among patients with diabetes undergoing atrial fibrillation ablation. JACC Clin  Electrophysiol. 2019;5:897–903. [PubMed: 31439289]  5.2.8. Treatment of Hypertension 1. Neefs J, van den Berg NW, Limpens J, et al. Aldosterone pathway blockade to prevent atrial  fibrillation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Cardiol. 2017;231:155–161. [PubMed:  28062142]  2. Steinberg JS, Shabanov V , Ponomarev D, et al. Effect of renal denervation and catheter ablation  vs catheter ablation alone on atrial fibrillation recurrence among patients with paroxysmal  atrial fibrillation and hypertension: the ERADICATE-AF randomized clinical trial. JAMA.  2020;323:248–255. [PubMed: 31961420]  3. Pathak RK, Middeldorp ME, Lau DH, et al. Aggressive risk factor reduction study for atrial  fibrillation and implications for the outcome of ablation: the ARREST-AF cohort study. J Am Coll  Cardiol. 2014;64:2222–2231. [PubMed: 25456757]  4. Rienstra M, Hobbelt AH, Alings M, et al. Targeted therapy of underlying conditions improves sinus  rhythm maintenance in patients with persistent atrial fibrillation: results of the RACE 3 trial. Eur  Heart J. 2018;39:2987–2996. [PubMed: 29401239]  5. Pinho-Gomes AC, Azevedo L, Copland E, et al. Blood pressure-lowering treatment for the  prevention of cardiovascular events in patients with atrial fibrillation: an individual participant data  meta-analysis. PLoS Med. 2021;18:e1003599. [PubMed: 34061831]  et al. Page 166 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

6. Pokorney SD, Piccini JP, Stevens SR, et al. Cause of death and predictors of all-cause mortality  in anticoagulated patients with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation: data from ROCKET AF. J Am Heart  Assoc. 2016;5:e002197. [PubMed: 26955859]  7. Rao MP, Halvorsen S, Wojdyla D, et al. Blood pressure control and risk of stroke or systemic  embolism in patients with atrial fibrillation: results from the Apixaban for Reduction in Stroke  and Other Thromboembolic Events in Atrial Fibrillation (ARISTOTLE) trial. J Am Heart Assoc.  2015;4:e002015. [PubMed: 26627878]  8. Parkash R, Wells GA, Sapp JL, et al. Effect of aggressive blood pressure control on the recurrence  of atrial fibrillation after catheter ablation: a randomized, open-label clinical trial (SMAC-AF  [Substrate Modification With Aggressive Blood Pressure Control]). Circulation. 2017;135:1788– 1798. [PubMed: 28228428]  9. Soliman EZ, Rahman AF, Zhang ZM, et al. Effect of intensive blood pressure lowering on the risk  of atrial fibrillation. Hypertension. 2020;75:1491–1496. [PubMed: 32362229]  10. Kim TH, Yang PS, Yu HT, et al. Effect of hypertension duration and blood pressure level on  ischaemic stroke risk in atrial fibrillation: nationwide data covering the entire Korean population.  Eur Heart J. 2019;40:809–819. [PubMed: 30608537]  11. Pathak RK, Middeldorp ME, Meredith M, et al. Long-term effect of goal-directed weight  management in an atrial fibrillation cohort: a long-term follow-up study (LEGACY). J Am Coll  Cardiol. 2015;65:2159–2169. [PubMed: 25792361]  5.2.9. Sleep 1. Kadhim K, Middeldorp ME, Elliott AD, et al. Prevalence and assessment of sleep-disordered  breathing in patients with atrial fibrillation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Can J Cardiol.  2021;37:1846–1856. [PubMed: 34606918]  2. Mohammadieh AM, Sutherland K, Kanagaratnam LB, et al. Clinical screening tools for obstructive  sleep apnea in a population with atrial fibrillation: a diagnostic accuracy trial. J Clin Sleep Med.  2021;17:1015–1024. [PubMed: 33560210]  3. Linz D, Brooks AG, Elliott AD, et al. Variability of sleep apnea severity and risk of atrial  fibrillation: the V ARIOSA-AF study. JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2019;5:692–701. [PubMed:  31221356]  4. Abumuamar AM, Dorian P, Newman D, et al. The prevalence of obstructive sleep apnea in patients  with atrial fibrillation. Clin Cardiol. 2018;41:601–607. [PubMed: 29745973]  5. Platek AE, Szymanski FM, Filipiak KJ, et al. Stratification of cardiovascular risk in patients  with atrial fibrillation and obstructive sleep apnea-validity of the 2MACE score. Sleep Breath.  2017;21:601–606. [PubMed: 28155102]  6. Li X, Zhou X, Xu X, et al. Effects of continuous positive airway pressure treatment in obstructive  sleep apnea patients with atrial fibrillation: a meta-analysis. Medicine (Baltim). 2021;100:e25438. 7. Yang Y , Ning Y , Wen W, et al. CPAP is associated with decreased risk of AF recurrence in patients  with OSA, especially those younger and slimmer: a meta-analysis. J Interv Card Electrophysiol.  2020;58:369–379. [PubMed: 32472281]  8. Congrete S, Bintvihok M, Thongprayoon C, et al. Effect of obstructive sleep apnea and its treatment  of atrial fibrillation recurrence after radiofrequency catheter ablation: a meta-analysis. J Evid Based  Med. 2018;11:145–151. [PubMed: 30091301]  9. Deng F, Raza A, Guo J. Treating obstructive sleep apnea with continuous positive airway pressure  reduces risk of recurrent atrial fibrillation after catheter ablation: a meta-analysis. Sleep Med.  2018;46:5–11. [PubMed: 29773211]  10. Qureshi WT, Nasir UB, Alqalyoobi S, et al. Meta-analysis of continuous positive airway pressure  as a therapy of atrial fibrillation in obstructive sleep apnea. Am J Cardiol. 2015;116:1767–1773.  [PubMed: 26482182]  11. Szymanski FM, Filipiak KJ, Platek AE, et al. Presence and severity of obstructive sleep apnea and  remote outcomes of atrial fibrillation ablations - a long-term prospective, cross-sectional cohort  study. Sleep Breath. 2015;19:849–856. [PubMed: 25566942]  et al. Page 167 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

12. Caples SM, Mansukhani MP, Friedman PA, et al. The impact of continuous positive airway  pressure treatment on the recurrence of atrial fibrillation post cardioversion: a randomized  controlled trial. Int J Cardiol. 2019;278:133–136. [PubMed: 30522886]  13. Traaen GM, Aakeroy L, Hunt TE, et al. Effect of continuous positive airway pressure on  arrhythmia in atrial fibrillation and sleep apnea: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Respir Crit  Care Med. 2021;204:573–582. [PubMed: 33938787]  14. Marti-Almor J, Marques P, Jesel L, et al. Incidence of sleep apnea and association with atrial  fibrillation in an unselected pacemaker population: results of the observational RESPIRE study.  Heart Rhythm. 2020;17:195–202. [PubMed: 31493591]  15. Yeung C, Drew D, Hammond S, et al. Extended cardiac monitoring in patients with severe  sleep apnea and no history of atrial fibrillation (the Reveal XT-SA study). Am J Cardiol.  2018;122:1885–1889. [PubMed: 30274768]  16. Zhao E, Chen S, Du Y , et al. Association between sleep apnea hypopnea syndrome and the risk of  atrial fibrillation: a meta-analysis of cohort study. Biomed Res Int. 2018;2018:5215868. [PubMed:  29581977]  17. May AM, Blackwell T, Stone PH, et al. Central sleep-disordered breathing predicts incident atrial  fibrillation in older men. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2016;193:783–791. [PubMed: 26595380]  18. Chao TF, Liu CJ, Chen SJ, et al. Incidence and risk of atrial fibrillation in sleep-disordered  breathing without coexistent systemic disease. Circ J. 2014;78:2182–2187. [PubMed: 25056423]  19. Christensen MA, Dixit S, Dewland TA, et al. Sleep characteristics that predict atrial fibrillation.  Heart Rhythm. 2018;15:1289–1295. [PubMed: 29958805]  20. Genuardi MV , Ogilvie RP, Saand AR, et al. Association of short sleep duration and atrial  fibrillation. Chest. 2019;156:544–552. [PubMed: 30825445]  21. Itoh H, Kaneko H, Fujiu K, et al. Risk factors and lifestyles in the development of atrial fibrillation  among individuals aged 20–39 years. Am J Cardiol. 2021;155:40–44. [PubMed: 34294408]  22. Hunt TE, Traaen GM, Aakeroy L, et al. Effect of continuous positive airway pressure therapy on  recurrence of atrial fibrillation after pulmonary vein isolation in patients with obstructive sleep  apnea: a randomized controlled trial. Heart Rhythm. 2022;19:1433–1441. [PubMed: 35716856]  5.2.10. Comprehensive Care 1. V oskoboinik A, Kalman JM, De Silva A, et al. Alcohol abstinence in drinkers with atrial fibrillation.  N Engl J Med. 2020;382:20–28. [PubMed: 31893513]  2. Abed HS, Wittert GA, Leong DP, et al. Effect of weight reduction and cardiometabolic risk factor  management on symptom burden and severity in patients with atrial fibrillation: a randomized  clinical trial. JAMA. 2013;310:2050–2060. [PubMed: 24240932]  3. Rienstra M, Hobbelt AH, Alings M, et al. Targeted therapy of underlying conditions improves sinus  rhythm maintenance in patients with persistent atrial fibrillation: results of the RACE 3 trial. Eur  Heart J. 2018;39:2987–2996. [PubMed: 29401239]  4. Hendriks JM, de Wit R, Crijns HJ, et al. Nurse-led care vs usual care for patients with atrial  fibrillation: results of a randomized trial of integrated chronic care vs routine clinical care in  ambulatory patients with atrial fibrillation. Eur Heart J. 2012;33:2692–2699. [PubMed: 22453654]  5. Guo Y , Lane DA, Wang L, et al. Mobile health technology to improve care for patients with atrial  fibrillation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2020;75:1523–1534. [PubMed: 32241367]  6. Karlsson LO, Nilsson S, Bång M, et al. A clinical decision support tool for improving adherence  to guidelines on anticoagulant therapy in patients with atrial fibrillation at risk of stroke: a  cluster-randomized trial in a Swedish primary care setting (the CDS-AF study). PLoS Med.  2018;15:e1002528. [PubMed: 29534063]  7. Piccini JP Sr, Allred J, Bunch TJ, et al. Rationale, considerations, and goals for atrial fibrillation  centers of excellence: a Heart Rhythm Society perspective. Heart Rhythm. 2020;17:1804–1832.  [PubMed: 32387248]  8. Younis A, Shaviv E, Nof E, et al. The role and outcome of cardiac rehabilitation program in patients  with atrial fibrillation. Clin Cardiol. 2018;41:1170–1176. [PubMed: 29934991]  et al. Page 168 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

9. Angaran P, Mariano Z, Dragan V , et al. The Atrial Fibrillation Therapies after ER visit: Outpatient  Care for Patients with Acute AF - the AFTER3 study. J Atr Fibrillation. 2015;7:1187. [PubMed:  27957150]  10. Wijtvliet E, Tieleman RG, van Gelder IC, et al. Nurse-led vs usual-care for atrial fibrillation. Eur  Heart J. 2020;41:634–641. [PubMed: 31544925]  11. van den Dries CJ, van Doorn S, Rutten FH, et al. Integrated management of atrial fibrillation in  primary care: results of the ALL-IN cluster randomized trial. Eur Heart J. 2020;41:2836–2844.  [PubMed: 32112556]  12. Stewart S, Ball J, Horowitz JD, et al. Standard versus atrial fibrillation-specific management  strategy (SAFETY) to reduce recurrent admission and prolong survival: pragmatic, multicentre,  randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2015;385:775–784. [PubMed: 25467562]  13. Willis TA, Collinson M, Glidewell L, et al. An adaptable implementation package targeting  evidence-based indicators in primary care: a pragmatic cluster-randomised evaluation. PLoS Med.  2020;17:e1003045. [PubMed: 32109257]  14. Cox JL, Parkash R, Foster GA, et al. Integrated Management Program Advancing Community  Treatment of Atrial Fibrillation (IMPACT-AF): a cluster randomized trial of a computerized  clinical decision support tool. Am Heart J. 2020;224:35–46. [PubMed: 32302788]  15. Arts DL, Abu-Hanna A, Medlock SK, et al. Effectiveness and usage of a decision support system  to improve stroke prevention in general practice: a cluster randomized controlled trial. PLoS One.  2017;12:e0170974. [PubMed: 28245247]  16. Vinereanu D, Lopes RD, Bahit MC, et al. A multifaceted intervention to improve treatment with  oral anticoagulants in atrial fibrillation (IMPACT-AF): an international, cluster-randomised trial.  Lancet. 2017;390:1737–1746. [PubMed: 28859942]  6.1. Risk Stratification Schemes 1. Singer DE, Chang Y , Borowsky LH, et al. A new risk scheme to predict ischemic stroke and  other thromboembolism in atrial fibrillation: the ATRIA study stroke risk score. J Am Heart Assoc.  2013;2:e000250. [PubMed: 23782923]  2. Lip GY , Nieuwlaat R, Pisters R, et al. Refining clinical risk stratification for predicting stroke  and thromboembolism in atrial fibrillation using a novel risk factor-based approach: the euro heart  survey on atrial fibrillation. Chest. 2010;137:263–272. [PubMed: 19762550]  3. Fox KAA, Lucas JE, Pieper KS, et al. Improved risk stratification of patients with atrial fibrillation:  an integrated GARFIELD-AF tool for the prediction of mortality, stroke and bleed in patients with  and without anticoagulation. BMJ Open. 2017;7:e017157. 4. Quinn GR, Severdija ON, Chang Y , et al. Wide variation in reported rates of stroke across cohorts of  patients with atrial fibrillation. Circulation. 2017;135:208–219. [PubMed: 27799272]  5. Pisters R, Lane DA, Nieuwlaat R, et al. A novel user-friendly score (HAS-BLED) to assess  1-year risk of major bleeding in patients with atrial fibrillation: the Euro Heart Survey. Chest.  2010;138:1093–1100. [PubMed: 20299623]  6. Gage BF, Yan Y , Milligan PE, et al. Clinical classification schemes for predicting hemorrhage:  results from the National Registry of Atrial Fibrillation (NRAF). Am Heart J. 2006;151:713–719.  [PubMed: 16504638]  7. Fang MC, Go AS, Chang Y , et al. A new risk scheme to predict warfarin-associated hemorrhage:  the ATRIA (Anticoagulation and Risk Factors in Atrial Fibrillation) Study. J Am Coll Cardiol.  2011;58:395–401. [PubMed: 21757117]  8. Friberg L, Rosenqvist M, Lip GY . Net clinical benefit of warfarin in patients with atrial fibrillation:  a report from the Swedish atrial fibrillation cohort study. Circulation. 2012;125:2298–2307.  [PubMed: 22514252]  9. Steinberg BA, Ballew NG, Greiner MA, et al. Ischemic and bleeding outcomes in patients with atrial  fibrillation and contraindications to oral anticoagulation. JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2019;5:1384– 1392. [PubMed: 31857036]  10. Chao TF, Lip GYH, Lin YJ, et al. Incident risk factors and major bleeding in patients with atrial  fibrillation treated with oral anticoagulants: a comparison of baseline, follow-up and delta HASet al. Page 169 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

BLED scores with an approach focused on modifiable bleeding risk factors. Thromb Haemost.  2018;118:768–777. [PubMed: 29510426]  11. Hlatky MA, Greenland P, Arnett DK, et al. Criteria for evaluation of novel markers of  cardiovascular risk: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation.  2009;119:2408–2416. [PubMed: 19364974]  12. Alkhouli M, Friedman PA. Ischemic stroke risk in patients with nonval-vular atrial fibrillation:  JACC review topic of the week. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;74:3050–3065. [PubMed: 31865973]  13. Takabayashi K, Hamatani Y , Yamashita Y , et al. Incidence of stroke or systemic embolism in  paroxysmal versus sustained atrial fibrillation: the Fushimi Atrial Fibrillation Registry. Stroke.  2015;46:3354–3361. [PubMed: 26514188]  14. Steinberg BA, Hellkamp AS, Lokhnygina Y , et al. Higher risk of death and stroke in patients  with persistent vs paroxysmal atrial fibrillation: results from the ROCKET-AF Trial. Eur Heart J.  2015;36:288–296. [PubMed: 25209598]  15. Gao X, Cai X, Yang Y , et al. Diagnostic accuracy of the HAS-BLED bleeding score in VKA-  or DOAC-treated patients with atrial fibrillation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Front  Cardiovasc Med. 2021;8:757087. [PubMed: 34881309]  16. Zhu W, Fu L, Ding Y , et al. Meta-analysis of ATRIA versus CHA(2)DS(2)-V ASc for predicting  stroke and thromboembolism in patients with atrial fibrillation. Int J Cardiol. 2017;227:436–442.  [PubMed: 27839802]  17. van den Ham HA, Klungel OH, Singer DE, et al. Comparative performance of ATRIA, CHADS2,  and CHA2DS2-V ASc risk scores predicting stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation: results from a  national primary care database. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;66:1851–1859. [PubMed: 26493655]  18. Dalgaard F, Pieper K, Verheugt F, et al. GARFIELD-AF model for prediction of stroke and major  bleeding in atrial fibrillation: a Danish nationwide validation study. BMJ Open. 2019;9:e033283. 19. van der Endt VHW, Milders J, Penning de Vries BBL, et al. Comprehensive comparison of stroke  risk score performance: a systematic review and meta-analysis among 6 267 728 patients with  atrial fibrillation. Europace. 2022;24:1739–1753. [PubMed: 35894866]  20. Chang G, Xie Q, Ma L, et al. Accuracy of HAS-BLED and other bleeding risk assessment tools in  predicting major bleeding events in atrial fibrillation: a network meta-analysis. J Thromb Haemost.  2020;18:791–801. [PubMed: 31782613]  21. Fauchier L, Chaize G, Gaudin AF, et al. Predictive ability of HAS-BLED, HEMORR2HAGES, and  ATRIA bleeding risk scores in patients with atrial fibrillation A French nationwide cross-sectional  study. Int J Cardiol. 2016;217:85–91. [PubMed: 27179213]  22. Shah SJ, Eckman MH, Aspberg S, et al. Effect of variation in published stroke rates on the  net clinical benefit of anticoagulation for atrial fibrillation. Ann Intern Med. 2018;169:517–527.  [PubMed: 30264130]  23. Go AS, Reynolds K, Yang J, et al. Association of burden of atrial fibrillation with risk of ischemic  stroke in adults with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation: the KP-RHYTHM study. JAMA Cardiol.  2018;3:601–608. [PubMed: 29799942]  24. Rao MP, Halvorsen S, Wojdyla D, et al. Blood pressure control and risk of stroke or systemic  embolism in patients with atrial fibrillation: results from the Apixaban for Reduction in Stroke  and Other Thromboembolic Events in Atrial Fibrillation (ARISTOTLE) trial. J Am Heart Assoc.  2015;4:e002015. [PubMed: 26627878]  25. Gage BF, Waterman AD, Shannon W, et al. Validation of clinical classification schemes for  predicting stroke: results from the National Registry of Atrial Fibrillation. JAMA. 2001;285:2864– 2870. [PubMed: 11401607]  26. Chao TF, Lip GY , Liu CJ, et al. Validation of a modified CHA2DS2-V ASc score for stroke  risk stratification in Asian patients with atrial fibrillation: a nationwide cohort study. Stroke.  2016;47:2462–2469. [PubMed: 27625386]  et al. Page 170 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

6.2. Risk-Based Selection of Oral Anticoagulation: Balancing Risks and Benefits 1. Al-Khatib SM, Thomas L, Wallentin L, et al. Outcomes of apixaban vs warfarin by type and  duration of atrial fibrillation: results from the ARISTOTLE trial. Eur Heart J. 2013;34:2464–2471.  [PubMed: 23594592]  2. Link MS, Giugliano RP, Ruff CT, et al. Stroke and mortality risk in patients with various patterns  of atrial fibrillation: results from the ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48 Trial (Effective Anticoagulation With  Factor Xa Next Generation in Atrial Fibrillation-Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction 48). Circ  Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2017;10:e004267. [PubMed: 28077507]  3. Steinberg BA, Hellkamp AS, Lokhnygina Y , et al. Higher risk of death and stroke in patients  with persistent vs paroxysmal atrial fibrillation: results from the ROCKET-AF Trial. Eur Heart J.  2015;36:288–296. [PubMed: 25209598]  4. Chao TF, Lip GYH, Lin YJ, et al. Incident risk factors and major bleeding in patients with  atrial fibrillation treated with oral anticoagulants: a comparison of baseline, follow-up and delta  HAS-BLED scores with an approach focused on modifiable bleeding risk factors. Thromb Haemost.  2018;118:768–777. [PubMed: 29510426]  5. Minhas AS, Jiang Q, Gu X, et al. Renal function in atrial fibrillation patients switched from warfarin  to a direct oral anticoagulant. J Thromb Thrombolysis. 2016;42:566–572. [PubMed: 27217043]  6. Yoon M, Yang PS, Jang E, et al. Dynamic changes of CHA2DS2-V ASc score and the risk of  ischaemic stroke in Asian patients with atrial fibrillation: a nationwide cohort study. Thromb  Haemost. 2018;118:1296–1304. [PubMed: 29723875]  6.3. Oral Anticoagulants 1. Zhu J, Alexander GC, Nazarian S, et al. Trends and variation in oral anticoagulant choice in patients  with atrial fibrillation, 2010–2017. Pharmacotherapy. 2018;38:907–920. [PubMed: 29920705]  2. Granger CB, Alexander JH, McMurray JJ, et al. Apixaban versus warfarin in patients with atrial  fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:981–992. [PubMed: 21870978]  3. Connolly SJ, Ezekowitz MD, Yusuf S, et al. Dabigatran versus warfarin in patients with atrial  fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2009;361:1139–1151. [PubMed: 19717844]  4. Giugliano RP, Ruff CT, Braunwald E, et al. Edoxaban versus warfarin in patients with atrial  fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2013;369:2093–2104. [PubMed: 24251359]  5. Patel MR, Mahaffey KW, Garg J, et al. Rivaroxaban versus warfarin in nonvalvular atrial fibrillation.  N Engl J Med. 2011;365:883–891. [PubMed: 21830957]  6.3.1. Antithrombotic Therapy 1. Connolly SJ, Ezekowitz MD, Yusuf S, et al. Dabigatran versus warfarin in patients with atrial  fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2009;361:1139–1151. [PubMed: 19717844]  2. Patel MR, Mahaffey KW, Garg J, et al. Rivaroxaban versus warfarin in nonvalvular atrial fibrillation.  N Engl J Med. 2011;365:883–891. [PubMed: 21830957]  3. Granger CB, Alexander JH, McMurray JJ, et al. Apixaban versus warfarin in patients with atrial  fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:981–992. [PubMed: 21870978]  4. Giugliano RP, Ruff CT, Braunwald E, et al. Edoxaban versus warfarin in patients with atrial  fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2013;369:2093–2104. [PubMed: 24251359]  5. Lopez-Lopez JA, Sterne JAC, Thom HHZ, et al. Oral anticoagulants for prevention of stroke in  atrial fibrillation: systematic review, network meta-analysis, and cost effectiveness analysis. Bmj.  2017;359:j5058. [PubMed: 29183961]  6. Ruff CT, Giugliano RP, Braunwald E, et al. Comparison of the efficacy and safety of new oral  anticoagulants with warfarin in patients with atrial fibrillation: a meta-analysis of randomised trials.  Lancet. 2014;383:955–962. [PubMed: 24315724]  7. Carnicelli AP, Hong H, Connolly SJ, et al. Direct oral anticoagulants versus warfarin in patients with  atrial fibrillation: patient-level network meta-analyses of randomized clinical trials with interaction  testing by age and sex. Circulation. 2022;145:242–255. [PubMed: 34985309]  et al. Page 171 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

8. Investigators AWGA, Connolly S, Pogue J, et al. Clopidogrel plus aspirin versus oral  anticoagulation for atrial fibrillation in the Atrial fibrillation Clopidogrel Trial with Irbesartan for  prevention of Vascular Events (ACTIVE W): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2006;367:1903– 1912. [PubMed: 16765759]  9. Connolly SJ, Camm AJ, Halperin JL, et al. Dronedarone in high-risk permanent atrial fibrillation. N  Engl J Med. 2011;365:2268–2276. [PubMed: 22082198]  10. Sato H, Ishikawa K, Kitabatake A, et al. Low-dose aspirin for prevention of stroke in low-risk  patients with atrial fibrillation: Japan Atrial Fibrillation Stroke Trial. Stroke. 2006;37:447–451.  [PubMed: 16385088]  11. Hart RG, Pearce LA, Aguilar MI. Meta-analysis: antithrombotic therapy to prevent stroke in  patients who have nonvalvular atrial fibrillation. Ann Intern Med. 2007;146:857–867. [PubMed:  17577005]  12. Nielsen PB, Skjoth F, Overvad TF, et al. Female sex is a risk modifier rather than a risk factor  for stroke in atrial fibrillation: should we use a CHA2DS2-V A score rather than CHA2DS2-V ASc?  Circulation. 2018;137:832–840. [PubMed: 29459469]  13. Aspberg S, Chang Y , Atterman A, et al. Comparison of the ATRIA, CHADS2, and CHA2DS2V ASc stroke risk scores in predicting ischaemic stroke in a large Swedish cohort of patients with  atrial fibrillation. Eur Heart J. 2016;37:3203–3210. [PubMed: 26941204]  14. Singer DE, Chang Y , Borowsky LH, et al. A new risk scheme to predict ischemic stroke and other  thromboembolism in atrial fibrillation: the ATRIA study stroke risk score. J Am Heart Assoc.  2013;2:e000250. [PubMed: 23782923]  15. Gage BF, Waterman AD, Shannon W, et al. Validation of clinical classification schemes for  predicting stroke: results from the National Registry of Atrial Fibrillation. JAMA. 2001;285:2864– 2870. [PubMed: 11401607]  16. Eckman MH, Singer DE, Rosand J, et al. Moving the tipping point: the decision to anticoagulate  patients with atrial fibrillation. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2011;4:14–21. [PubMed:  21139092]  17. Ommen SR, Mital S, Burke MA, et al. 2020 AHA/ACC guideline for the diagnosis and treatment  of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a report of the American College of Cardiology/ American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation.  2020;142:e558–e631. [PubMed: 33215931]  18. Brokmeier H, Kido K. Off-label use for direct oral anticoagulants: valvular atrial fibrillation,  heart failure, left ventricular thrombus, superficial vein thrombosis, pulmonary hypertension-a  systematic review. Ann Pharmacother. 2021;55:995–1009. [PubMed: 33148014]  19. Hart RG, Pearce LA, Miller VT, et al. Cardioembolic vs noncardioembolic strokes in atrial  fibrillation: frequency and effect of antithrombotic agents in the stroke prevention in atrial  fibrillation studies. Cerebrovasc Dis. 2000;10:39–43. [PubMed: 10629345]  6.3.1.1. Considerations in Managing Anticoagulants 1. Mueck W, Kubitza D, Becka M. Co-administration of rivaroxaban with drugs that share  its elimination pathways: pharmacokinetic effects in healthy subjects. Br J Clin Pharmacol.  2013;76:455–466. [PubMed: 23305158]  2. Frost CE, Byon W, Song Y , et al. Effect of ketoconazole and diltiazem on the pharmacokinetics  of apixaban, an oral direct factor Xa inhibitor. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2015;79:838–846. [PubMed:  25377242]  3. Parasrampuria DA, Mendell J, Shi M, et al. Edoxaban drug-drug interactions with ketoconazole,  erythromycin, and cyclosporine. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2016;82:1591–1600. [PubMed: 27530188]  4. Perlman A, Goldstein R, Choshen Cohen L, et al. Effect of enzyme-inducing antiseizure  medications on the risk of sub-therapeutic concentrations of direct oral anticoagulants: a  retrospective cohort study. CNS Drugs. 2021;35:305–316. [PubMed: 33595834]  5. Vakkalagadda B, Frost C, Byon W, et al. Effect of rifampin on the pharmacokinetics of apixaban, an  oral direct inhibitor of factor Xa. Am J Cardiovasc Drugs. 2016;16:119–127. [PubMed: 26749408]  et al. Page 172 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

6. Perlman A, Wanounou M, Goldstein R, et al. Ischemic and thrombotic events associated with  concomitant Xa-inhibiting direct oral anticoagulants and antiepileptic drugs: analysis of the FDA  Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS). CNS Drugs. 2019;33:1223–1228. [PubMed: 31686406]  7. Giustozzi M, Mazzetti M, Paciaroni M, et al. Concomitant use of direct oral anticoagulants and  antiepileptic drugs: a prospective cohort study in patients with atrial fibrillation. Clin Drug Investig.  2021;41:43–51. 8. Wan Y , Heneghan C, Perera R, et al. Anticoagulation control and prediction of adverse events in  patients with atrial fibrillation: a systematic review. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2008;1:84–91.  [PubMed: 20031794]  9. De Assis MC, Rabelo ER, Ávila CW, et al. Improved oral anticoagulation after a dietary vitamin  K-guided strategy: a randomized controlled trial. Circulation. 2009;120:1115–1122. [PubMed:  19738137]  10. Wang M, Zeraatkar D, Obeda M, et al. Drug-drug interactions with warfarin: a systematic review  and meta-analysis. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2021;87:4051–4100. [PubMed: 33769581]  11. Kido K, Shimizu M, Shiga T, et al. Meta-analysis comparing inappropriately low dose versus  standard dose of direct oral anticoagulants in patients with atrial fibrillation. J Am Pharm Assoc  (2003). 2022;62:487–495.e482. [PubMed: 34815185]  12. Zhang XL, Zhang XW, Wang TY , et al. Off-label under- and overdosing of direct oral  anticoagulants in patients with atrial fibrillation: a meta-analysis. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes.  2021;14:e007971. [PubMed: 34932377]  13. Eliquis [package insert]. Princeton, NJ: Bristol-Myers Squibb; 2021. 14. Pradaxa [package insert]. Ridgefield, CT: Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals, Inc; 2021. 15. Sugrue A, Sanborn D, Amin M, et al. Inappropriate dosing of direct oral anticoagulants in patients  with atrial fibrillation. Am J Cardiol. 2021;144:52–59. [PubMed: 33385355]  16. Sato T, Aizawa Y , Fuse K, et al. The comparison of inappropriate-low-doses use among 4 direct  oral anticoagulants in patients with atrial fibrillation: from the database of a single-center registry.  J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2018;27:3280–3288. [PubMed: 30121155]  17. Yu HT, Yang PS, Jang E, et al. Label adherence of direct oral anticoagulants dosing and clinical  outcomes in patients with atrial fibrillation. J Am Heart Assoc. 2020;9:e014177. [PubMed:  32495677]  18. Camm AJ, Cools F, Virdone S, et al. Mortality in patients with atrial fibrillation receiving  nonrecommended doses of direct oral anticoagulants. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2020;76:1425–1436.  [PubMed: 32943160]  19. Stampfuss J, Kubitza D, Becka M, et al. The effect of food on the absorption and pharmacokinetics  of rivaroxaban. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2013;51:549–561. [PubMed: 23458226]  20. Xarelto [package insert]. Titusville, NJ: Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Inc; 2023. 21. Savaysa [package insert]. Basking Ridge, NJ: Daiichi Sankyo, Inc; 2021. 22. Coumadin [package insert]. Princeton, NJ: Bristol-Myers Squibb; 2012. 23. Kido K Atrial fibrillation/atrial flutter: stroke prevention. In: CardSAP 2021; Book 2. Arrhythmias  and Thrombosis. American College of Clinical Pharmacy; 2021:32–33. 6.4. Silent AF and Stroke of Undetermined Cause 1. Gladstone DJ, Spring M, Dorian P, et al. Atrial fibrillation in patients with cryptogenic stroke. N  Engl J Med. 2014;370:2467–2477. [PubMed: 24963566]  2. Saver JL. CLINICAL PRACTICE Cryptogenic Stroke. N Engl J Med. 2016;374:2065–2074.  [PubMed: 27223148]  3. Ibeh C, Elkind MSV . Stroke prevention after cryptogenic stroke. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2021;23:174.  [PubMed: 34657187]  4. Melis F, Guido M, Amellone C, et al. Prevalence and predictors of atrial fibrillation in patients  with embolic stroke of undetermined source: a real-life single-center retrospective study. Neurol Sci.  2021;42:3707–3714. [PubMed: 33443664]  et al. Page 173 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

5. Victor CU, Carolina PE, Jorge TR, et al. Incidence and predictive factors of hidden atrial fibrillation  detected by implantable loop recorder after an embolic stroke of undetermined source. J Atr  Fibrillation. 2018;11:2078. [PubMed: 31139276]  6. Hart RG, Connolly SJ, Mundl H. Rivaroxaban for stroke prevention after embolic stroke of  undetermined source. N Engl J Med. 2018;379:987. [PubMed: 30184459]  7. Diener HC, Sacco RL, Easton JD, et al. Dabigatran for prevention of stroke after embolic stroke of  undetermined source. N Engl J Med. 2019;380:1906–1917. [PubMed: 31091372]  8. Stroke Prevention in Atrial Fibrillation Study. Final results. Circulation. 1991;84:527–539.  [PubMed: 1860198]  9. Sanna T, Diener HC, Passman RS, et al. Cryptogenic stroke and underlying atrial fibrillation. N Engl  J Med. 2014;370:2478–2486. [PubMed: 24963567]  10. Wachter R, Gröschel K, Gelbrich G, et al. Holter-electrocardiogram-monitoring in patients with  acute ischaemic stroke (Find-AF(RANDOMISED)): an open-label randomised controlled trial.  Lancet Neurol. 2017;16:282–290. [PubMed: 28187920]  11. Sposato LA, Cipriano LE, Saposnik G, et al. Diagnosis of atrial fibrillation after stroke and  transient ischaemic attack: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Neurol. 2015;14:377– 387. [PubMed: 25748102]  12. Brambatti M, Connolly SJ, Gold MR, et al. Temporal relationship between subclinical atrial  fibrillation and embolic events. Circulation. 2014;129:2094–2099. [PubMed: 24633881]  13. Buck BH, Hill MD, Quinn FR, et al. Effect of implantable vs prolonged external  electrocardiographic monitoring on atrial fibrillation detection in patients with ischemic stroke:  the per diem randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2021;325:2160–2168. [PubMed: 34061146]  6.4.1. Oral Anticoagulation for Device-Detected Atrial High-Rate Episodes Among  Patients Without a Previous Diagnosis of AF 1. Van Gelder IC, Healey JS, Crijns H, et al. Duration of device-detected subclinical atrial fibrillation  and occurrence of stroke in ASSERT. Eur Heart J. 2017;38:1339–1344. [PubMed: 28329139]  2. Kaplan RM, Koehler J, Ziegler PD, et al. Stroke risk as a function of atrial fibrillation duration and  CHA2DS2-V ASc score. Circulation. 2019;140:1639–1646. [PubMed: 31564126]  3. Perino AC, Fan J, Askari M, et al. Practice variation in anticoagulation prescription and outcomes  after device-detected atrial fibrillation. Circulation. 2019;139:2502–2512. [PubMed: 30880434]  4. Swiryn S, Orlov MV , Benditt DG, et al. Clinical implications of brief device-detected atrial  tachyarrhythmias in a cardiac rhythm management device population: results from the registry  of atrial tachycardia and atrial fibrillation episodes. Circulation. 2016;134:1130–1140. [PubMed:  27754946]  5. Boriani G, Glotzer TV , Santini M, et al. Device-detected atrial fibrillation and risk for stroke: an  analysis of >10 000 patients from the SOS AF project (Stroke preventiOn Strategies based on  Atrial Fibrillation information from implanted devices). Eur Heart J. 2014;35:508–516. [PubMed:  24334432]  6. Mahajan R, Perera T, Elliott AD, et al. Subclinical device-detected atrial fibrillation and stroke risk:  a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur Heart J. 2018;39:1407–1415. [PubMed: 29340587]  7. Park YJ, Kim JS, Park KM, et al. Subclinical atrial fibrillation burden and adverse clinical outcomes  in patients with permanent pacemakers. Stroke. 2021;52:1299–1308. [PubMed: 33588601]  8. Eckman MH, Singer DE, Rosand J, et al. Moving the tipping point: the decision to anticoagulate  patients with atrial fibrillation. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2011;4:14–21. [PubMed:  21139092]  9. Pollak WM, Simmons JD, Interian A Jr, et al. Clinical utility of intraatrial pacemaker stored  electrograms to diagnose atrial fibrillation and flutter. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2001;24:424–429.  [PubMed: 11341078]  10. Glotzer TV , Hellkamp AS, Zimmerman J, et al. Atrial high rate episodes detected by pacemaker  diagnostics predict death and stroke: report of the Atrial Diagnostics Ancillary Study of the MOde  Selection Trial (MOST). Circulation. 2003;107:1614–1619. [PubMed: 12668495]  et al. Page 174 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

11. Capucci A, Santini M, Padeletti L, et al. Monitored atrial fibrillation duration predicts arterial  embolic events in patients suffering from bradycardia and atrial fibrillation implanted with  antitachycardia pacemakers. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;46:1913–1920. [PubMed: 16286180]  12. Botto GL, Padeletti L, Santini M, et al. Presence and duration of atrial fibrillation detected by  continuous monitoring: crucial implications for the risk of thromboembolic events. J Cardiovasc  Electrophysiol. 2009;20:241–248. [PubMed: 19175849]  13. Noseworthy PA, Kaufman ES, Chen LY , et al. Subclinical and device-detected atrial fibrillation:  pondering the knowledge gap: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association.  Circulation. 2019;140:e944–e963. [PubMed: 31694402]  14. Freedman B, Boriani G, Glotzer TV , et al. Management of atrial high-rate episodes detected by  cardiac implanted electronic devices. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2017;14:701–714. [PubMed: 28682320]  6.5.1. Percutaneous Approaches to Occlude the LAA 1. Reddy VY , Sievert H, Halperin J, et al. Percutaneous left atrial appendage closure vs warfarin for  atrial fibrillation: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2014;312:1988–1998. [PubMed: 25399274]  2. Holmes DR Jr, Kar S, Price MJ, et al. Prospective randomized evaluation of the Watchman left atrial  appendage closure device in patients with atrial fibrillation versus long-term warfarin therapy: the  PREV AIL trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:1–12. [PubMed: 24998121]  3. Reddy VY , Doshi SK, Kar S, et al. 5-Year outcomes after left atrial appendage closure: from the  PREV AIL and PROTECT AF trials. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;70:2964–2975. [PubMed: 29103847]  4. Osmancik P, Herman D, Neuzil P, et al. Left atrial appendage closure versus direct oral  anticoagulants in high-risk patients with atrial fibrillation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2020;75:3122–3135.  [PubMed: 32586585]  5. Reddy VY , Mobius-Winkler S, Miller MA, et al. Left atrial appendage closure with the Watchman  device in patients with a contraindication for oral anticoagulation: the ASAP study (ASA Plavix  Feasibility Study With Watchman Left Atrial Appendage Closure Technology). J Am Coll Cardiol.  2013;61:2551–2556. [PubMed: 23583249]  6. Boersma LV , Ince H, Kische S, et al. Efficacy and safety of left atrial appendage closure with  W ATCHMAN in patients with or without contraindication to oral anticoagulation: 1-year follow-up  outcome data of the EWOLUTION trial. Heart Rhythm. 2017;14:1302–1308. [PubMed: 28577840]  7. Kar S, Doshi SK, Sadhu A, et al. Primary outcome evaluation of a next-generation left atrial  appendage closure device: results from the PINNACLE FLX trial. Circulation. 2021;143:1754– 1762. [PubMed: 33820423]  8. Freeman JV , Higgins AY , Wang Y , et al. Antithrombotic therapy after left atrial appendage occlusion  in patients with atrial fibrillation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2022;79:1785–1798. [PubMed: 35512858]  9. Holmes DR, Reddy VY , Buchbinder M, et al. The assessment of the Watchman device in patients  unsuitable for oral anticoagulation (ASAP-TOO) trial. Am Heart J. 2017;189:68–74. [PubMed:  28625383]  6.5.2. Cardiac Surgery—LAA Exclusion/Excision 1. Whitlock RP, Belley-Cote EP, Paparella D, et al. Left atrial appendage occlusion during cardiac  surgery to prevent stroke. N Engl J Med. 2021;384:2081–2091. [PubMed: 33999547]  2. Friedman DJ, Piccini JP, Wang T, et al. Association between left atrial appendage occlusion and  readmission for thromboembolism among patients with atrial fibrillation undergoing concomitant  cardiac surgery. JAMA. 2018;319:365–374. [PubMed: 29362794]  3. Martín Gutiérrez E, Castaño M, Gualis J, et al. Beneficial effect of left atrial appendage closure  during cardiac surgery: a meta-analysis of 280 585 patients. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2020;57:252– 262. [PubMed: 31711150]  4. Healey JS, Crystal E, Lamy A, et al. Left Atrial Appendage Occlusion Study (LAAOS): results of a  randomized controlled pilot study of left atrial appendage occlusion during coronary bypass surgery  in patients at risk for stroke. Am Heart J. 2005;150:288–293. [PubMed: 16086933]  et al. Page 175 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

5. Aryana A, Singh SK, Singh SM, et al. Association between incomplete surgical ligation of left atrial  appendage and stroke and systemic embolization. Heart Rhythm. 2015;12:1431–1437. [PubMed:  25998141]  6. Madden JL. Resection of the left auricular appendix; a prophylaxis for recurrent arterial emboli.  JAMA. 1949;140:769–772. 7. Melduni RM, Schaff HV , Lee HC, et al. Impact of left atrial appendage closure during cardiac  surgery on the occurrence of early postoperative atrial fibrillation, stroke, and mortality. Circulation.  2017;135:366–378. [PubMed: 27903589]  8. Elbadawi A, Ogunbayo GO, Elgendy IY , et al. Impact of left atrial appendage exclusion on  cardiovascular outcomes in patients with atrial fibrillation undergoing coronary artery bypass  grafting (from the National Inpatient Sample Database). Am J Cardiol. 2017;120:953–958.  [PubMed: 28754565]  9. Gutiérrez EM, Castaño M, Gualis J, et al. Beneficial effect of left atrial appendage closure during  cardiac surgery: a meta-analysis of 280 585 patients. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2020;57:252–262.  [PubMed: 31711150]  10. Elbadawi A, Olorunfemi O, Ogunbayo GO, et al. Cardiovascular outcomes with surgical left  atrial appendage exclusion in patients with atrial fibrillation who underwent valvular heart surgery  (from the National Inpatient Sample Database). Am J Cardiol. 2017;119:2056–2060. [PubMed:  28438308]  11. Prasad RM, Saleh Y , Al-Abcha A, et al. Left atrial appendage closure during cardiac surgery for  atrial fibrillation: a meta-analysis. Cardiovasc Revasc Med. 2022;40:26–36. [PubMed: 34801420]  12. Rashid HN, Layland J. Modification of the left atrial appendage and its role in stroke risk  reduction with non-valvular atrial fibrillation. Int J Cardiol Heart Vasc. 2021;32:100688. [PubMed:  33354620]  13. Toale C, Fitzmaurice GJ, Eaton D, et al. Outcomes of left atrial appendage occlusion using  the AtriClip device: a systematic review. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2019;29:655–662.  [PubMed: 31292605]  14. Nso N, Nassar M, Zirkiyeva M, et al. Outcomes of cardiac surgery with left atrial appendage  occlusion versus no occlusion, direct oral anticoagulants, and vitamin K antagonists: a systematic  review with meta-analysis. Int J Cardiol Heart Vasc. 2022;40:100998. [PubMed: 35655531]  15. Park-Hansen J, Holme SJV , Irmukhamedov A, et al. Adding left atrial appendage closure to open  heart surgery provides protection from ischemic brain injury six years after surgery independently  of atrial fibrillation history: the LAACS randomized study. J Cardiothorac Surg. 2018;13:53.  [PubMed: 29792215]  6.6. Active Bleeding on Anticoagulant Therapy and Reversal Drugs 1. Pollack CV Jr, Reilly PA, van Ryn J, et al. Idarucizumab for dabigatran reversal - full cohort  analysis. N Engl J Med. 2017;377:431–441. [PubMed: 28693366]  2. Van der Wall SJ, Lopes RD, Aisenberg J, et al. Idarucizumab for dabigatran reversal in the  management of patients with gastrointestinal bleeding. Circulation. 2019;139:748–756. [PubMed:  30586692]  3. Eikelboom JW, van Ryn J, Reilly P, et al. Dabigatran reversal with idarucizumab in patients with  renal impairment. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;74:1760–1768. [PubMed: 31582135]  4. Schulman S, Ritchie B, Nahirniak S, et al. Reversal of dabigatran-associated major bleeding  with activated prothrombin concentrate: A prospective cohort study. Thromb Res. 2017;152:44–48.  [PubMed: 28222322]  5. Eerenberg ES, Kamphuisen PW, Sijpkens MK, et al. Reversal of rivaroxaban and dabigatran by  prothrombin complex concentrate: a randomized, placebo-controlled, crossover study in healthy  subjects. Circulation. 2011;124:1573–1579. [PubMed: 21900088]  6. Connolly SJ, Crowther M, Eikelboom JW, et al. Full study report of andexanet alfa for bleeding  associated with factor Xa inhibitors. N Engl J Med. 2019;380:1326–1335. [PubMed: 30730782]  et al. Page 176 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

7. Nederpelt CJ, Naar L, Krijnen P, et al. Andexanet alfa or prothrombin complex concentrate for  factor Xa inhibitor reversal in acute major bleeding: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit  Care Med. 2021;49:e1025–e1036. [PubMed: 33967205]  8. Chai-Adisaksopha C, Hillis C, Siegal DM, et al. Prothrombin complex concentrates versus fresh  frozen plasma for warfarin reversal. A systematic review and meta-analysis. Thromb Haemost.  2016;116:879–890. [PubMed: 27488143]  9. Sarode R, Milling TJ Jr, Refaai MA, et al. Efficacy and safety of a 4-factor prothrombin complex  concentrate in patients on vitamin K antagonists presenting with major bleeding: a randomized,  plasma-controlled, phase IIIb study. Circulation. 2013;128:1234–1243. [PubMed: 23935011]  10. Goldstein JN, Refaai MA, Milling TJ Jr, et al. Four-factor prothrombin complex concentrate versus  plasma for rapid vitamin K antagonist reversal in patients needing urgent surgical or invasive  interventions: a phase 3b, open-label, non-inferiority, randomised trial. Lancet. 2015;385:2077– 2087. [PubMed: 25728933]  11. Tapaskar N, Pang A, Werner DA, et al. Resuming anticoagulation following hospitalization  for gastrointestinal bleeding is associated with reduced thromboembolic events and improved  mortality: results from a systematic review and meta-analysis. Dig Dis Sci. 2021;66:554–566.  [PubMed: 32279174]  12. Proietti M, Romiti GF, Romanazzi I, et al. Restarting oral anticoagulant therapy after major  bleeding in atrial fibrillation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Cardiol. 2018;261:84– 91. [PubMed: 29572080]  13. Siegal DM. What we have learned about direct oral anticoagulant reversal. Hematology Am Soc  Hematol Educ Program. 2019;2019:198–203. [PubMed: 31808835]  14. Wang X, Mondal S, Wang J, et al. Effect of activated charcoal on apixaban pharmacokinetics in  healthy subjects. Am J Cardiovasc Drugs. 2014;14:147–154. [PubMed: 24277644]  15. Ollier E, Hodin S, Lanoiselee J, et al. Effect of activated charcoal on rivaroxaban complex  absorption. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2017;56:793–801. [PubMed: 27910037]  16. Chai-Adisaksopha C, Hillis C, Lim W, et al. Hemodialysis for the treatment of dabigatranassociated bleeding: a case report and systematic review. J Thromb Haemost. 2015;13:1790–1798.  [PubMed: 26270886]  17. Geller AI, Shehab N, Lovegrove MC, et al. Emergency visits for oral anticoagulant bleeding. J Gen  Intern Med. 2020;35:371–373. [PubMed: 31664597]  18. Gómez-Outes A, Alcubilla P, Calvo-Rojas G, et al. Meta-analysis of reversal agents for severe  bleeding associated with direct oral anticoagulants. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021;77:2987–3001.  [PubMed: 34140101]  19. Majeed A, Wallvik N, Eriksson J, et al. Optimal timing of vitamin K antagonist resumption after  upper gastrointestinal bleeding. A risk modelling analysis. Thromb Haemost. 2017;117:491–499.  [PubMed: 28004062]  20. Qureshi W, Mittal C, Patsias I, et al. Restarting anticoagulation and outcomes after major  gastrointestinal bleeding in atrial fibrillation. Am J Cardiol. 2014;113:662–668. [PubMed:  24355310]  21. Witt DM, Delate T, Garcia DA, et al. Risk of thromboembolism, recurrent hemorrhage, and  death after warfarin therapy interruption for gastrointestinal tract bleeding. Arch Intern Med.  2012;172:1484–1491. [PubMed: 22987143]  22. Kido K Atrial fibrillation/atrial flutter: stroke prevention. In: CardSAP 2021; Book 2. Arrhythmias  and Thrombosis. American College of Clinical Pharmacy; 2021:32–33. 6.6.1. Management of Patients With AF and ICH 1. Kuramatsu JB, Sembill JA, Gerner ST, et al. Management of therapeutic anticoagulation in patients  with intracerebral haemorrhage and mechanical heart valves. Eur Heart J. 2018;39:1709–1723.  [PubMed: 29529259]  2. Korompoki E, Filippidis FT, Nielsen PB, et al. Long-term antithrombotic treatment in intracranial  hemorrhage survivors with atrial fibrillation. Neurology. 2017;89:687–696. [PubMed: 28724590]  et al. Page 177 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

3. Pennlert J, Overholser R, Asplund K, et al. Optimal timing of anticoagulant treatment after  intracerebral hemorrhage in patients with atrial fibrillation. Stroke. 2017;48:314–320. [PubMed:  27999135]  4. Nielsen PB, Larsen TB, Skjoth F, et al. Restarting anticoagulant treatment after intracranial  hemorrhage in patients with atrial fibrillation and the impact on recurrent stroke, mortality, and  bleeding: a nationwide cohort study. Circulation. 2015;132:517–525. [PubMed: 26059010]  5. Murthy SB, Gupta A, Merkler AE, et al. Restarting anticoagulant therapy after intracranial  hemorrhage: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Stroke. 2017;48:1594–1600. [PubMed:  28416626]  6. Holmes DR, Reddy VY , Turi ZG, et al. Percutaneous closure of the left atrial appendage versus  warfarin therapy for prevention of stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation: a randomised noninferiority trial. Lancet. 2009;374:534–542. [PubMed: 19683639]  7. Holmes DR Jr, Kar S, Price MJ, et al. Prospective randomized evaluation of the Watchman Left  Atrial Appendage Closure device in patients with atrial fibrillation versus long-term warfarin  therapy: the PREV AIL trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:1–12. [PubMed: 24998121]  8. Szekely P Systemic embolism and anticoagulant prophylaxis in rheumatic heart disease. Br Med J.  1964;1:1209–1212. [PubMed: 14120826]  9. Cannegieter SC, Rosendaal FR, Briet E. Thromboembolic and bleeding complications in patients  with mechanical heart valve prostheses. Circulation. 1994;89:635–641. [PubMed: 8313552]  10. Baudet EM, Puel V , McBride JT, et al. Long-term results of valve replacement with the St Jude  Medical prosthesis. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1995;109:858–870. [PubMed: 7739245]  11. Salem DN, Stein PD, Al-Ahmad A, et al. Antithrombotic therapy in valvular heart disease--native  and prosthetic: the Seventh ACCP Conference on Antithrombotic and Thrombolytic Therapy.  Chest. 2004;126:457S–482S. [PubMed: 15383481]  12. Schols AM, Schreuder FH, van Raak EP, et al. Incidence of oral anticoagulant-associated  intracerebral hemorrhage in the Netherlands. Stroke. 2014;45:268–270. [PubMed: 24203841]  13. Seiffge DJ, Goeldlin MB, Tatlisumak T, et al. Meta-analysis of haematoma volume, haematoma  expansion and mortality in intracerebral haemorrhage associated with oral anticoagulant use. J  Neurol. 2019;266:3126–3135. [PubMed: 31541341]  14. Flaherty ML, Haverbusch M, Sekar P, et al. Location and outcome of anticoagulant-associated  intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurocrit Care. 2006;5:197–201. [PubMed: 17290088]  15. Flibotte JJ, Hagan N, O'Donnell J, et al. Warfarin, hematoma expansion, and outcome of  intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurology. 2004;63:1059–1064. [PubMed: 15452298]  16. Poli L, Grassi M, Zedde M, et al. Anticoagulants resumption after warfarinrelated intracerebral  haemorrhage: the Multicenter Study on Cerebral Hemorrhage in Italy (MUCH-Italy). Thromb  Haemost. 2018;118:572–580. [PubMed: 29433151]  17. Nielsen-Kudsk JE, Johnsen SP, Wester P, et al. Left atrial appendage occlusion versus standard  medical care in patients with atrial fibrillation and intracerebral haemorrhage: a propensity scorematched follow-up study. EuroIntervention. 2017;13:371–378. [PubMed: 28485276]  18. Ottosen TP, Grijota M, Hansen ML, et al. Use of antithrombotic therapy and long-term  clinical outcome among patients surviving intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 2016;47:1837–1843.  [PubMed: 27301947]  19. Chao TF, Liu CJ, Liao JN, et al. Use of Oral anticoagulants for stroke prevention in patients with  atrial fibrillation who have a history of intracranial hemorrhage. Circulation. 2016;133:1540–1547.  [PubMed: 26969761]  20. Park Y A, Uhm JS, Pak HN, et al. Anticoagulation therapy in atrial fibrillation after intracranial  hemorrhage. Heart Rhythm. 2016;13:1794–1802. [PubMed: 27554947]  21. Kuramatsu JB, Gerner ST, Schellinger PD, et al. Anticoagulant reversal, blood pressure levels,  and anticoagulant resumption in patients with anticoagulation-related intracerebral hemorrhage.  JAMA. 2015;313:824–836. [PubMed: 25710659]  22. Biffi A, Kuramatsu JB, Leasure A, et al. Oral anticoagulation and functional outcome after  intracerebral hemorrhage. Ann Neurol. 2017;82:755–765. [PubMed: 29028130]  et al. Page 178 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

23. Guo Y , Lip GY , Apostolakis S. Bleeding risk assessment and management in atrial fibrillation  patients. Key messages for clinical practice from the European Heart Rhythm Association position  statement. Pol Arch Med Wewn. 2012;122:235–242. [PubMed: 22660688]  24. Charidimou A, Boulouis G, Xiong L, et al. Cortical superficial siderosis and first-ever  cerebral hemorrhage in cerebral amyloid angiopathy. Neurology. 2017;88:1607–1614. [PubMed:  28356458]  25. Stoddard MF, Dawkins PR, Prince CR, et al. Left atrial appendage thrombus is not uncommon  in patients with acute atrial fibrillation and a recent embolic event: a transesophageal  echocardiographic study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1995;25:452–459. [PubMed: 7829800]  26. Blackshear JL, Odell JA. Appendage obliteration to reduce stroke in cardiac surgical patients with  atrial fibrillation. Ann Thorac Surg. 1996;61:755–759. [PubMed: 8572814]  27. Reddy VY , Doshi SK, Kar S, et al. 5-Year outcomes after left atrial appendage closure: from  the PREV AIL and PROTECT AF trials. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;70:2964–2975. [PubMed:  29103847]  28. Branzoli S, Marini M, Guarracini F, et al. Epicardial standalone left atrial appendage clipping  for prevention of ischemic stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation contraindicated for oral  anticaogulation. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2020;31:2187–2191. [PubMed: 32495408]  29. Antaki T, Michaelman J, McGroarty J. Robotics-assisted epicardial left atrial appendage clip  exclusion. JTCVS Tech. 2021;9:59–68. [PubMed: 34647061]  6.7. Periprocedural Management 1. Douketis JD, Spyropoulos AC, Kaatz S, et al. Perioperative bridging anticoagulation in patients with  atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2015;373:823–833. [PubMed: 26095867]  2. Becerra AF, Cornavaca MT, Revigliono JI, et al. Perioperative management of vitamin K antagonists  in patients with low thromboembolic risk undergoing elective surgery: a prospective experience.  Med Clin (Barc). 2017;149:281–286. [PubMed: 28283268]  3. Siegal D, Yudin J, Kaatz S, et al. Periprocedural heparin bridging in patients receiving vitamin  K antagonists: systematic review and meta-analysis of bleeding and thromboembolic rates.  Circulation. 2012;126:1630–1639. [PubMed: 22912386]  4. Douketis JD, Spyropoulos AC, Duncan J, et al. Perioperative management of patients with  atrial fibrillation receiving a direct oral anticoagulant. JAMA Intern Med. 2019;179:1469–1478.  [PubMed: 31380891]  5. Birnie DH, Healey JS, Wells GA, et al. Pacemaker or defibrillator surgery without interruption of  anticoagulation. N Engl J Med. 2013;368:2084–2093. [PubMed: 23659733]  6. Cheng A, Nazarian S, Brinker JA, et al. Continuation of warfarin during pacemaker or implantable  cardioverter-defibrillator implantation: a randomized clinical trial. Heart Rhythm. 2011;8:536–540.  [PubMed: 21147261]  7. Tolosana JM, Berne P, Mont L, et al. Preparation for pacemaker or implantable cardiac defibrillator  implants in patients with high risk of thrombo-embolic events: oral anticoagulation or bridging with  intravenous heparin? A prospective randomized trial. Eur Heart J. 2009;30:1880–1884. [PubMed:  19487235]  8. Mendoza PA, Narula S, McIntyre WF, et al. Continued versus interrupted direct oral anticoagulation  for cardiac electronic device implantation: a systematic review. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol.  2020;43:1373–1381. [PubMed: 33058175]  9. Birnie DH, Healey JS, Wells GA, et al. Continued vs interrupted direct oral anticoagulants at the  time of device surgery, in patients with moderate to high risk of arterial thrombo-embolic events  (BRUISE CONTROL-2). Eur Heart J. 2018;39:3973–3979. [PubMed: 30462279]  10. Ricciardi D, Creta A, Colaiori I, et al. Interrupted versus uninterrupted novel oral anticoagulant  peri-implantation of cardiac device: a single-center randomized prospective pilot trial. Pacing Clin  Electrophysiol. 2018;41:1476–1480. [PubMed: 30132926]  11. Godier A, Martin AC, Leblanc I, et al. Peri-procedural management of dabigatran and rivaroxaban:  duration of anticoagulant discontinuation and drug concentrations. Thromb Res. 2015;136:763– 768. [PubMed: 26319422]  et al. Page 179 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

12. Merli GJ, Kraft WK, Eraso LH, et al. Apixaban Discontinuation for Invasive Or major  Surgical procedures (ADIOS): a prospective cohort study. Vasc Med. 2022;27:269–276. [PubMed:  34809507]  13. Kovacs MJ, Wells PS, Anderson DR, et al. Postoperative low molecular weight heparin bridging  treatment for patients at high risk of arterial thromboembolism (PERIOP2): double blind  randomised controlled trial. Bmj. 2021;373:n1205. [PubMed: 34108229]  14. Bajkin BV , Popovic SL, Selakovic SD. Randomized, prospective trial comparing bridging therapy  using low-molecular-weight heparin with maintenance of oral anticoagulation during extraction of  teeth. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2009;67:990–995. [PubMed: 19375008]  15. Steinberg BA, Peterson ED, Kim S, et al. Use and outcomes associated with bridging  during anticoagulation interruptions in patients with atrial fibrillation: findings from the  Outcomes Registry for Better Informed Treatment of Atrial Fibrillation (ORBIT-AF). Circulation.  2015;131:488–494. [PubMed: 25499873]  16. Doherty JU, Gluckman TJ, Hucker WJ, et al. 2017 ACC expert consensus decision pathway for  periprocedural management of anticoagulation in patients with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation: a  report of the American College of Cardiology Clinical Expert Consensus Document Task Force. J  Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;69:871–898. [PubMed: 28081965]  17. Rosencher N, Llau JV , Mueck W, et al. Incidence of neuraxial haematoma after total hip  or knee surgery: RECORD programme (rivaroxaban vs enoxaparin). Acta Anaesthesiol Scand.  2013;57:565–572. [PubMed: 23336294]  18. Garcia DA, Regan S, Henault LE, et al. Risk of thromboembolism with short-term interruption of  warfarin therapy. Arch Intern Med. 2008;168:63–69. [PubMed: 18195197]  19. Michaud GF, Pelosi F Jr, Noble MD, et al. A randomized trial comparing heparin initiation 6  h or 24 h after pacemaker or defibrillator implantation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2000;35:1915–1918.  [PubMed: 10841243]  20. Beyer-Westendorf J, Gelbricht V , Forster K, et al. Peri-interventional management of novel oral  anticoagulants in daily care: results from the prospective Dresden NOAC registry. Eur Heart J.  2014;35:1888–1896. [PubMed: 24394381]  21. Nazha B, Pandya B, Cohen J, et al. Periprocedural outcomes of direct oral anticoagulants versus  warfarin in nonvalvular atrial fibrillation. Circulation. 2018;138:1402–1411. [PubMed: 29794081]  22. Colonna P, von Heymann C, Santamaria A, et al. Routine clinical practice in the periprocedural  management of edoxaban therapy is associated with low risk of bleeding and thromboembolic  complications: the prospective, observational, and multinational EMIT-AF/VTE study. Clin  Cardiol. 2020;43:769–780. [PubMed: 32406557]  23. Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al. 2020 ACC/AHA guideline for the management of  patients with valvular heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American  Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2021;143:e72– e227. [PubMed: 33332150]  6.8.1. AF Complicating ACS or PCI 1. Lopes RD, Heizer G, Aronson R, et al. Antithrombotic therapy after acute coronary syndrome or  PCI in atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2019;380:1509–1524. [PubMed: 30883055]  2. Cannon CP, Bhatt DL, Oldgren J, et al. Dual antithrombotic therapy with dabigatran after PCI in  atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2017;377:1513–1524. [PubMed: 28844193]  3. Vranckx P, Valgimigli M, Eckardt L, et al. Edoxaban-based versus vitamin K antagonist-based  antithrombotic regimen after successful coronary stenting in patients with atrial fibrillation  (ENTRUST-AF PCI): a randomised, open-label, phase 3b trial. Lancet. 2019;394:1335–1343.  [PubMed: 31492505]  4. Gibson CM, Mehran R, Bode C, et al. Prevention of bleeding in patients with atrial fibrillation  undergoing PCI. N Engl J Med. 2016;375:2423–2434. [PubMed: 27959713]  5. Potpara TS, Mujovic N, Proietti M, et al. Revisiting the effects of omitting aspirin in combined  antithrombotic therapies for atrial fibrillation and acute coronary syndromes or percutaneous  coronary interventions: meta-analysis of pooled data from the PIONEER AF-PCI, RE-DUAL PCI,  and AUGUSTUS trials. Europace. 2020;22:33–46. [PubMed: 31603196]  et al. Page 180 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

6. Dewilde WJ, Oirbans T, Verheugt FW, et al. Use of clopidogrel with or without aspirin in  patients taking oral anticoagulant therapy and undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention: an  open-label, randomised, controlled trial. Lancet. 2013;381:1107–1115. [PubMed: 23415013]  6.8.2. Chronic Coronary Disease (CCD) 1. Yasuda S, Kaikita K, Akao M, et al. Antithrombotic therapy for atrial fibrillation with stable  coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2019;381:1103–1113. [PubMed: 31475793]  2. Matsumura-Nakano Y , Shizuta S, Komasa A, et al. Open-label randomized trial comparing oral  anticoagulation with and without single antiplatelet therapy in patients with atrial fibrillation  and stable coronary artery disease beyond 1 year after coronary stent implantation. Circulation.  2019;139:604–616. [PubMed: 30586700]  3. Matoba T, Yasuda S, Kaikita K, et al. Rivaroxaban monotherapy in patients with atrial fibrillation  after coronary stenting: insights from the AFIRE trial. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2021;14:2330– 2340. [PubMed: 34736731]  6.8.3. Peripheral Artery Disease (PAD) 1. Zhang H, Xue Z, Yi D, et al. Non-vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulants versus warfarin in  patients with atrial fibrillation with coronary or peripheral artery disease. Int Heart J. 2020;61:231– 238. [PubMed: 32173695]  2. Jones WS, Hellkamp AS, Halperin J, et al. Efficacy and safety of rivaroxaban compared with  warfarin in patients with peripheral artery disease and non-valvular atrial fibrillation: insights from  ROCKET AF. Eur Heart J. 2014;35:242–249. [PubMed: 24302273]  3. Hu PT, Lopes RD, Stevens SR, et al. Efficacy and safety of apixaban compared with warfarin in  patients with atrial fibrillation and peripheral artery disease: insights from the ARISTOTLE trial. J  Am Heart Assoc. 2017;6:e004699. [PubMed: 28096100]  4. Bonaca MP, Antman EM, Cunningham JW, et al. Ischaemic and bleeding risk in atrial fibrillation  with and without peripheral artery disease and efficacy and safety of full- and half-dose edoxaban vs  warfarin: insights from ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Pharmacother. 2022;8:695– 706. [PubMed: 34962979]  5. Inohara T, Shrader P, Pieper K, et al. Treatment of atrial fibrillation with concomitant coronary or  peripheral artery disease: results from the outcomes registry for better informed treatment of atrial  fibrillation II. Am Heart J. 2019;213:81–90. [PubMed: 31129441]  6. Gerhard-Herman MD, Gornik HL, Barrett C, et al. 2016 AHA/ACC guideline on the management  of patients with lower extremity peripheral artery disease: a report of the American College of  Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation.  2017;135:e726–e779. [PubMed: 27840333]  7. Anand S, Yusuf S, et al. ; The Warfarin Antiplatelet Vascular Evaluation Trial Investigators. Oral  anticoagulant and antiplatelet therapy and peripheral arterial disease. N Engl J Med. 2007;357:217– 227. [PubMed: 17634457]  8. Lamberts M, Lip GY , Ruwald MH, et al. Antithrombotic treatment in patients with heart failure  and associated atrial fibrillation and vascular disease: a nationwide cohort study. J Am Coll Cardiol.  2014;63:2689–2698. [PubMed: 24794118]  6.8.4. Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD)/Kidney Failure 1. Kimachi M, Furukawa TA, Kimachi K, et al. Direct oral anticoagulants versus warfarin for  preventing stroke and systemic embolic events among atrial fibrillation patients with chronic kidney  disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;11:Cd011373. [PubMed: 29105079]  2. Ha JT, Neuen BL, Cheng LP, et al. Benefits and harms of oral anticoagulant therapy in chronic  kidney disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med. 2019;171:181–189.  [PubMed: 31307056]  3. Hart RG, Pearce LA, Asinger RW, et al. Warfarin in atrial fibrillation patients with moderate chronic  kidney disease. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011;6:2599–2604. [PubMed: 21903982]  et al. Page 181 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

4. Stanifer JW, Pokorney SD, Chertow GM, et al. Apixaban versus warfarin in patients with atrial  fibrillation and advanced chronic kidney disease. Circulation. 2020;141:1384–1392. [PubMed:  32160801]  5. Carrero JJ, Evans M, Szummer K, et al. Warfarin, kidney dysfunction, and outcomes following  acute myocardial infarction in patients with atrial fibrillation. JAMA. 2014;311:919–928. [PubMed:  24595776]  6. Bonde AN, Lip GY , Kamper AL, et al. Net clinical benefit of antithrombotic therapy in patients with  atrial fibrillation and chronic kidney disease: a nationwide observational cohort study. J Am Coll  Cardiol. 2014;64:2471–2482. [PubMed: 25500231]  7. Randhawa MS, Vishwanath R, Rai MP, et al. Association between use of warfarin for atrial  fibrillation and outcomes among patients with end-stage renal disease: a systematic review and  meta-analysis. JAMA Netw Open. 2020;3:e202175. [PubMed: 32250434]  8. Go AS, Fang MC, Udaltsova N, et al. Impact of proteinuria and glomerular filtration rate on risk  of thromboembolism in atrial fibrillation: the anticoagulation and risk factors in atrial fibrillation  (ATRIA) study. Circulation. 2009;119:1363–1369. [PubMed: 19255343]  9. Roberts PR, Stromberg K, Johnson LC, et al. A systematic review of the incidence of arrhythmias in  hemodialysis patients undergoing long-term monitoring with implantable loop recorders. Kidney Int  Rep. 2021;6:56–65. [PubMed: 33426385]  10. Zimmerman D, Sood MM, Rigatto C, et al. Systematic review and meta-analysis of incidence,  prevalence and outcomes of atrial fibrillation in patients on dialysis. Nephrol Dial Transplant.  2012;27:3816–3822. [PubMed: 23114904]  11. Murray AM, Seliger S, Lakshminarayan K, et al. Incidence of stroke before and after dialysis  initiation in older patients. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013;24:1166–1173. [PubMed: 23620399]  12. De Vriese AS, Heine G. Anticoagulation management in haemodialysis patients with atrial  fibrillation: evidence and opinion. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2022;37:2072–2079. [PubMed:  33647941]  13. Yang F, Hellyer JA, Than C, et al. Warfarin utilisation and anticoagulation control in patients with  atrial fibrillation and chronic kidney disease. Heart. 2017;103:818–826. [PubMed: 27852694]  14. Hayashi M, Takamatsu I, Kanno Y , et al. A case-control study of calciphylaxis in Japanese endstage renal disease patients. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2012;27:1580–1584. [PubMed: 22121234]  15. Chan KE, Edelman ER, Wenger JB, et al. Dabigatran and rivaroxaban use in atrial fibrillation  patients on hemodialysis. Circulation. 2015;131:972–979. [PubMed: 25595139]  16. Stangier J, Rathgen K, Stahle H, et al. Influence of renal impairment on the pharmacokinetics and  pharmacodynamics of oral dabigatran etexilate: an open-label, parallel-group, single-centre study.  Clin Pharmacokinet. 2010;49:259–268. [PubMed: 20214409]  17. De Vriese AS, Caluwé R, Van Der Meersch H, et al. Safety and efficacy of vitamin K antagonists  versus rivaroxaban in hemodialysis patients with atrial fibrillation: a multicenter randomized  controlled trial. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2021;32:1474–1483. [PubMed: 33753537]  18. Lin YC, Chen BL, Shih CM, et al. Effectiveness and safety of rivaroxaban versus warfarin in  Taiwanese patients with end-stage renal disease and nonvalvular atrial fibrillation: a real-world  nationwide cohort study. PLoS One. 2021;16:e0249940. [PubMed: 33831130]  19. Genovesi S, Porcu L, Slaviero G, et al. Outcomes on safety and efficacy of left atrial appendage  occlusion in end stage renal disease patients undergoing dialysis. J Nephrol. 2021;34:63–73.  [PubMed: 32535831]  20. Eikelboom JW, Connolly SJ, Gao P, et al. Stroke risk and efficacy of apixaban in atrial fibrillation  patients with moderate chronic kidney disease. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2012;21:429–435.  [PubMed: 22818021]  21. Winkelmayer WC, Liu J, Setoguchi S, et al. Effectiveness and safety of warfarin initiation in older  hemodialysis patients with incident atrial fibrillation. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011;6:2662–2668.  [PubMed: 21959598]  22. Welander F, Renlund H, Dimeny E, et al. Efficacy and safety of warfarin in patients with  non-valvular atrial fibrillation and CKD G3-G5D. Clin Kidney J. 2022;15:1169–1178. [PubMed:  35664263]  et al. Page 182 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

23. Connolly SJ, Eikelboom J, Joyner C, et al. Apixaban in patients with atrial fibrillation. N Engl J  Med. 2011;364:806–817. [PubMed: 21309657]  24. Granger CB, Alexander JH, McMurray JJ, et al. Apixaban versus warfarin in patients with atrial  fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:981–992. [PubMed: 21870978]  25. Wang X, Tirucherai G, Marbury TC, et al. Pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and safety  of apixaban in subjects with end-stage renal disease on hemodialysis. J Clin Pharmacol.  2016;56:628–636. [PubMed: 26331581]  26. Mavrakanas TA, Samer CF, Nessim SJ, et al. Apixaban pharmacokinetics at steady state in  hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2017;28:2241–2248. [PubMed: 28302754]  27. Siontis KC, Zhang X, Eckard A, et al. Outcomes associated with apixaban use in patients with  end-stage kidney disease and atrial fibrillation in the United States. Circulation. 2018;138:1519– 1529. [PubMed: 29954737]  28. Mavrakanas TA, Garlo K, Charytan DM. Apixaban versus no anticoagulation in patients  undergoing long-term dialysis with incident atrial fibrillation. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol.  2020;15:1146–1154. [PubMed: 32444398]  29. Reinecke H, Engelbertz C, Bauersachs R, et al. A randomized controlled trial comparing apixaban  to the vitamin K-antagonist phenprocoumon in patients on chronic hemodialysis: the AXADIAAFNET 8 study. Circulation. 2022;147:296–309. [PubMed: 36335915]  30. Pokorney SD, Chertow GM, Al-Khalidi HR, et al. Apixaban for patients with atrial fibrillation  on hemodialysis: a multicenter randomized controlled trial. Circulation. 2022;146:1735–1745.  [PubMed: 36335914]  6.8.5. AF in VHD 1. Connolly SJ, Karthikeyan G, Ntsekhe M, et al. Rivaroxaban in rheumatic heart disease-associated  atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2022;387:978–988. [PubMed: 36036525]  2. Connolly SJ, Ezekowitz MD, Yusuf S, et al. Dabigatran versus warfarin in patients with atrial  fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2009;361:1139–1151. [PubMed: 19717844]  3. Patel MR, Mahaffey KW, Garg J, et al. Rivaroxaban versus warfarin in nonvalvular atrial fibrillation.  N Engl J Med. 2011;365:883–891. [PubMed: 21830957]  4. Granger CB, Alexander JH, McMurray JJ, et al. Apixaban versus warfarin in patients with atrial  fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:981–992. [PubMed: 21870978]  5. Giugliano RP, Ruff CT, Braunwald E, et al. Edoxaban versus warfarin in patients with atrial  fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2013;369:2093–2104. [PubMed: 24251359]  6. López-López JA, Sterne JAC, Thom HHZ, et al. Oral anticoagulants for prevention of stroke in  atrial fibrillation: systematic review, network meta-analysis, and cost effectiveness analysis. BMJ.  2017;359:j5058. [PubMed: 29183961]  7. Carnicelli AP, Hong H, Connolly SJ, et al. Direct oral anticoagulants versus warfarin in patients with  atrial fibrillation: patient-level network meta-analyses of randomized clinical trials with interaction  testing by age and sex. Circulation. 2022;145:242–255. [PubMed: 34985309]  8. Ruff CT, Giugliano RP, Braunwald E, et al. Comparison of the efficacy and safety of new oral  anticoagulants with warfarin in patients with atrial fibrillation: a meta-analysis of randomised trials.  Lancet. 2014;383:955–962. [PubMed: 24315724]  9. Lip GYH, Jensen M, Melgaard L, et al. Stroke and bleeding risk scores in patients with atrial  fibrillation and valvular heart disease: evaluating 'valvular heart disease' in a nationwide cohort  study. Europace. 2019;21:33–40. [PubMed: 29986001]  10. Eikelboom JW, Connolly SJ, Brueckmann M, et al. Dabigatran versus warfarin in patients with  mechanical heart valves. N Engl J Med. 2013;369:1206–1214. [PubMed: 23991661]  11. Wolf PA, Dawber TR, Thomas HE Jr, et al. Epidemiologic assessment of chronic atrial fibrillation  and risk of stroke: the Framingham study. Neurology. 1978;28:973–977. [PubMed: 570666]  12. Kim JY , Kim SH, Myong JP, et al. Outcomes of direct oral anticoagulants in patients with mitral  stenosis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;73:1123–1131. [PubMed: 30871695]  et al. Page 183 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

13. Brokmeier H, Kido K. Off-label use for direct oral anticoagulants: valvular atrial fibrillation,  heart failure, left ventricular thrombus, superficial vein thrombosis, pulmonary hypertension-a  systematic review. Ann Pharmacother. 2021;55:995–1009. [PubMed: 33148014]  14. Siontis KC, Yao X, Gersh BJ, et al. Direct oral anticoagulants in patients with atrial fibrillation and  valvular heart disease other than significant mitral stenosis and mechanical valves: a meta-analysis.  Circulation. 2017;135:714–716. [PubMed: 28193802]  15. Jawitz OK, Wang TY , Lopes RD, et al. Rationale and design of PROACT Xa: a randomized,  multicenter, open-label, clinical trial to evaluate the efficacy and safety of apixaban versus warfarin  in patients with a mechanical On-X Aortic Heart Valve. Am Heart J. 2020;227:91–99. [PubMed:  32693197]  6.8.6. Anticoagulation of Typical AFL 1. Gula LJ, Redfearn DP, Jenkyn KB, et al. Elevated incidence of atrial fibrillation and stroke in  patients with atrial flutter-a population-based study. Can J Cardiol. 2018;34:774–783. [PubMed:  29801742]  2. Gronefeld GC, Wegener F, Israel CW, et al. Thromboembolic risk of patients referred for  radiofrequency catheter ablation of typical atrial flutter without prior appropriate anticoagulation  therapy. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2003;26:323–327. [PubMed: 12687838]  3. Vadmann H, Nielsen PB, Hjortshøj SP, et al. Atrial flutter and thromboembolic risk: a systematic  review. Heart. 2015;101:1446–1455. [PubMed: 26149627]  4. Gallagher MM, Hennessy BJ, Edvardsson N, et al. Embolic complications of direct current  cardioversion of atrial arrhythmias: association with low intensity of anticoagulation at the time  of cardioversion. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002;40:926–933. [PubMed: 12225717]  5. Pérez FJ, Schubert CM, Parvez B, et al. Long-term outcomes after catheter ablation of cavotricuspid isthmus dependent atrial flutter: a meta-analysis. Circ Arrhyth Electrophysiol. 2009;2:393– 401. 6. Hart RG, Pearce LA, Aguilar MI. Meta-analysis: antithrombotic therapy to prevent stroke in patients  who have nonvalvular atrial fibrillation. Ann Intern Med. 2007;146:857–867. [PubMed: 17577005]  7. Maskoun W, Pino MI, Ayoub K, et al. Incidence of atrial fibrillation after atrial flutter ablation.  JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2016;2:682–690. [PubMed: 29759746]  8. Sanna T, Diener HC, Passman RS, et al. Cryptogenic stroke and underlying atrial fibrillation. N Engl  J Med. 2014;370:2478–2486. [PubMed: 24963567]  9. Andrade JG, Wells GA, Deyell MW, et al. Cryoablation or drug therapy for initial treatment of atrial  fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2021;384:305–315. [PubMed: 33197159]  10. Haghjoo M, Salem N, Rafati M, et al. Predictors of the atrial fibrillation following catheter ablation  of typical atrial flutter. Res Cardiovasc Med. 2013;2:90–94. [PubMed: 25478500]  11. Ellis K, Wazni O, Marrouche N, et al. Incidence of atrial fibrillation post-cavotricuspid isthmus  ablation in patients with typical atrial flutter: left-atrial size as an independent predictor of atrial  fibrillation recurrence. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2007;18:799–802. [PubMed: 17593230]  12. Exposito V , Rodriguez-Entem F, Gonzalez-Enriquez S, et al. Stroke and systemic embolism after  successful ablation of typical atrial flutter. Clin Cardiol. 2016;39:347–351. [PubMed: 27028600]  13. Giehm-Reese M, Johansen MN, Kronborg MB, et al. Discontinuation of oral anticoagulation and  risk of stroke and death after ablation for typical atrial flutter: a nation-wide Danish cohort study.  Int J Cardiol. 2021;333:110–116. [PubMed: 33647366]  14. Granada J, Uribe W, Chyou PH, et al. Incidence and predictors of atrial flutter in the general  population. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2000;36:2242–2246. [PubMed: 11127467]  15. Ammar AS, Elsherbiny I, El-Dosouky II, et al. Left atrial and left atrial appendage functional  recovery after cardioversion in patients with recent atrial fibrillation: serial echocardiographic  study. Cardiol J. 2015;22:699–707. [PubMed: 26412612]  16. Grimm RA, Stewart WJ, Arheart K, et al. Left atrial appendage “stunning” after electrical  cardioversion of atrial flutter: an attenuated response compared with atrial fibrillation as the  mechanism for lower susceptibility to thromboembolic events. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1997;29:582– 589. [PubMed: 9060897]  et al. Page 184 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

17. Takami M, Suzuki M, Sugi K, et al. Time course for resolution of left atrial appendage stunning  after catheter ablation of chronic atrial flutter. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;41:2207–2211. [PubMed:  12821249]  18. Spector P, Reynolds MR, Calkins H, et al. Meta-analysis of ablation of atrial flutter and  supraventricular tachycardia. Am J Cardiol. 2009;104:671–677. [PubMed: 19699343]  19. Celikyurt U, Knecht S, Kuehne M, et al. Incidence of new-onset atrial fibrillation after  cavotricuspid isthmus ablation for atrial flutter. Europace. 2017;19:1776–1780. [PubMed:  28069839]  20. V oight J, Akkaya M, Somasundaram P, et al. Risk of new-onset atrial fibrillation and stroke  after radiofrequency ablation of isolated, typical atrial flutter. Heart Rhythm. 2014;11:1884–1889.  [PubMed: 24998999]  21. Chen K, Bai R, Deng W, et al. HATCH score in the prediction of new-onset atrial fibrillation after  catheter ablation of typical atrial flutter. Heart Rhythm. 2015;12:1483–1489. [PubMed: 25850017]  22. Romero J, Diaz JC, Di Biase L, et al. Atrial fibrillation inducibility during cavotricuspid isthmusdependent atrial flutter ablation as a predictor of clinical atrial fibrillation A meta-analysis. J Interv  Card Electrophysiol. 2017;48:307–315. [PubMed: 28070875]  23. Joza J, Filion KB, Eberg M, et al. Prognostic value of atrial fibrillation inducibility after right atrial  flutter ablation. Heart Rhythm. 2014;11:1870–1876. [PubMed: 24981869]  24. Henmi R, Ejima K, Shoda M, et al. Interatrial conduction time can predict new-onset  atrial fibrillation after radiofrequency ablation of isolated, typical atrial flutter. J Cardiovasc  Electrophysiol. 2016;27:1293–1297. [PubMed: 27422488]  25. Valles E, Marti-Almor J, Grau N, et al. Influence of PACE score and conduction disturbances in  the incidence of early new onset atrial fibrillation after typical atrial flutter ablation. J Cardiol.  2022;79:417–422. [PubMed: 34774385]  26. Seara JG, Roubin SR, Gude Sampedro F, et al. Risk of atrial fibrillation, stroke, and death after  radiofrequency catheter ablation of typical atrial flutter. Clin Res Cardiol. 2014;103:543–552.  [PubMed: 24566731]  7.1. Broad Considerations for Rate Control 1. Wyse DG, Waldo AL, DiMarco JP, et al. A comparison of rate control and rhythm control in patients  with atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2002;347:1825–1833. [PubMed: 12466506]  2. Van Gelder IC, Groenveld HF, Crijns HJ, et al. Lenient versus strict rate control in patients with  atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:1363–1373. [PubMed: 20231232]  3. Al-Khatib SM, Allen LaPointe NM, Chatterjee R, et al. Rate- and rhythm-control therapies in  patients with atrial fibrillation: a systematic review. Ann Intern Med. 2014;160:760–773. [PubMed:  24887617]  4. Moschovitis G, Johnson LSB, Blum S, et al. Heart rate and adverse outcomes in patients with  prevalent atrial fibrillation. Open Heart. 2021;8:e001606. [PubMed: 33883229]  5. Song S, Ko JS, Lee HA, et al. Clinical implications of heart rate control in heart failure with atrial  fibrillation: Multi-Center Prospective Observation Registry (CODE-AF Registry). Front Cardiovasc  Med. 2022;9:787869. [PubMed: 35391851]  6. Opolski G, Torbicki A, Kosior DA, et al. Rate control vs rhythm control in patients with nonvalvular  persistent atrial fibrillation: the results of the Polish How to Treat Chronic Atrial Fibrillation (HOT  CAFE) Study. Chest. 2004;126:476–486. [PubMed: 15302734]  7. Groenveld HF, Crijns HJ, Van den Berg MP, et al. The effect of rate control on quality of  life in patients with permanent atrial fibrillation: data from the RACE II (Rate Control Efficacy  in Permanent Atrial Fibrillation II) study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;58:1795–1803. [PubMed:  21996393]  8. Groenveld HF, Tijssen JG, Crijns HJ, et al. Rate control efficacy in permanent atrial fibrillation:  successful and failed strict rate control against a background of lenient rate control: data from  RACE II (Rate Control Efficacy in Permanent Atrial Fibrillation). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61:741– 748. [PubMed: 23410544]  et al. Page 185 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

9. Steinberg BA, Kim S, Thomas L, et al. Increased heart rate is associated with higher mortality  in patients with atrial fibrillation (AF): results from the Outcomes Registry for Better Informed  Treatment of AF (ORBIT-AF). J Am Heart Assoc. 2015;4:e002031. [PubMed: 26370445]  10. Pandey A, Kim S, Moore C, et al. Predictors and prognostic implications of incident heart failure  in patients with prevalent atrial fibrillation. JACC Heart Fail. 2017;5:44–52. [PubMed: 28034376]  11. Cullington D, Goode KM, Zhang J, et al. Is heart rate important for patients with heart failure in  atrial fibrillation? JACC Heart Fail. 2014;2:213–220. [PubMed: 24952686]  12. Li SJ, Sartipy U, Lund LH, et al. Prognostic significance of resting heart rate and use of betablockers in atrial fibrillation and sinus rhythm in patients with heart failure and reduced ejection  fraction: findings from the Swedish Heart Failure Registry. Circ Heart Fail. 2015;8:871–879.  [PubMed: 26243796]  13. Mulder BA, Damman K, Van Veldhuisen DJ, et al. Heart rate and outcome in heart failure  with reduced ejection fraction: differences between atrial fibrillation and sinus rhythm-a CIBIS II  analysis. Clin Cardiol. 2017;40:740–745. [PubMed: 28513877]  14. Sartipy U, Savarese G, Dahlstrom U, et al. Association of heart rate with mortality in sinus  rhythm and atrial fibrillation in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Eur J Heart Fail.  2019;21:471–479. [PubMed: 30698317]  15. Hess PL, Sheng S, Matsouaka R, et al. Strict versus lenient versus poor rate control among  patients with atrial fibrillation and heart failure (from the Get With The Guidelines - Heart Failure  Program). Am J Cardiol. 2020;125:894–900. [PubMed: 31980141]  16. Docherty KF, Shen L, Castagno D, et al. Relationship between heart rate and outcomes in patients  in sinus rhythm or atrial fibrillation with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction. Eur J Heart  Fail. 2020;22:528–538. [PubMed: 31849164]  17. Kirchhof P, Camm AJ, Goette A, et al. Early rhythm-control therapy in patients with atrial  fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2020;383:1305–1316. [PubMed: 32865375]  18. Van Gelder IC, Groenveld HF, Crijns HJGM, et al. Lenient versus strict rate control in patients  with atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:1363–1373. [PubMed: 20231232]  19. Nerheim P, Birger-Botkin S, Piracha L, et al. Heart failure and sudden death in patients with  tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy and recurrent tachycardia. Circulation. 2004;110:247–252.  [PubMed: 15226218]  20. van Gelder IC, Phan HM, Wilkoff BL, et al. Prognostic significance of atrial arrhythmias in a  primary prevention ICD population. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2011;34:1070–1079. [PubMed:  21605131]  21. Boriani G, Gasparini M, Landolina M, et al. Incidence and clinical relevance of uncontrolled  ventricular rate during atrial fibrillation in heart failure patients treated with cardiac  resynchronization therapy. Eur J Heart Fail. 2011;13:868–876. [PubMed: 21558331]  22. Boriani G, Padeletti L, Santini M, et al. Rate control in patients with pacemaker affected by  brady-tachy form of sick sinus syndrome. Am Heart J. 2007;154:193–200. [PubMed: 17584576]  7.2. Specific Pharmacological Agents for Rate Control 1. Ulimoen SR, Enger S, Carlson J, et al. Comparison of four single-drug regimens on ventricular  rate and arrhythmia-related symptoms in patients with permanent atrial fibrillation. Am J Cardiol.  2013;111:225–230. [PubMed: 23111138]  2. Nikolaidou T, Channer KS. Chronic atrial fibrillation: a systematic review of medical heart rate  control management. Postgrad Med J. 2009;85:303–312. [PubMed: 19528305]  7.2.1. Acute Rate Control 1. Platia EV , Michelson EL, Porterfield JK, et al. Esmolol versus verapamil in the acute treatment of  atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter. Am J Cardiol. 1989;63:925–929. [PubMed: 2564725]  2. Elkayam U Calcium channel blockers in heart failure. Cardiology. 1998;89(suppl 1):38–46.  [PubMed: 9570428]  et al. Page 186 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

3. Lan Q, Wu F, Han B, et al. Intravenous diltiazem versus metoprolol for atrial fibrillation with rapid  ventricular rate: a meta-analysis. Am J Emerg Med. 2022;51:248–256. [PubMed: 34781150]  4. Fromm C, Suau SJ, Cohen V , et al. Diltiazem vs metoprolol in the management of atrial fibrillation  or flutter with rapid ventricular rate in the emergency department. J Emerg Med. 2015;49:175–182.  [PubMed: 25913166]  5. Intravenous digoxin in acute atrial fibrillation. Results of a randomized, placebo-controlled  multicentre trial in 239 patients. The Digitalis in Acute Atrial Fibrillation (DAAF) Trial Group.  Eur Heart J. 1997;18:649–654. [PubMed: 9129897]  6. Siu CW, Lau CP, Lee WL, et al. Intravenous diltiazem is superior to intravenous amiodarone or  digoxin for achieving ventricular rate control in patients with acute uncomplicated atrial fibrillation.  Crit Care Med. 2009;37:2174–2179; quiz 2180. [PubMed: 19487941]  7. Schreck DM, Rivera AR, Tricarico VJ. Emergency management of atrial fibrillation and flutter:  intravenous diltiazem versus intravenous digoxin. Ann Emerg Med. 1997;29:135–140. [PubMed:  8998092]  8. Shojaee M, Feizi B, Miri R, et al. Intravenous amiodarone versus digoxin in atrial fibrillation rate  control; a clinical trial. Emergency. 2017;5:e29. [PubMed: 28286836]  9. Wattanasuwan N, Khan IA, Mehta NJ, et al. Acute ventricular rate control in atrial fibrillation: IV  combination of diltiazem and digoxin vs IV diltiazem alone. Chest. 2001;119:502–506. [PubMed:  11171729]  10. Ramesh T, Lee PYK, Mitta M, et al. Intravenous magnesium in the management of rapid  atrial fibrillation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Cardiol. 2021;78:375–381. [PubMed:  34162502]  11. Ho KM, Sheridan DJ, Paterson T. Use of intravenous magnesium to treat acute onset atrial  fibrillation: a meta-analysis. Heart. 2007;93:1433–1440. [PubMed: 17449500]  12. Clemo HF, Wood MA, Gilligan DM, et al. Intravenous amiodarone for acute heart rate control in  the critically ill patient with atrial tachyarrhythmias. Am J Cardiol. 1998;81:594–598. [PubMed:  9514456]  13. Delle Karth G, Geppert A, Neunteufl T, et al. Amiodarone versus diltiazem for rate control in  critically ill patients with atrial tachyarrhythmias. Crit Care Med. 2001;29:1149–1153. [PubMed:  11395591]  14. Jandali MB. Safety of intravenous diltiazem in reduced ejection fraction heart failure with rapid  atrial fibrillation. Clin Drug Investig. 2018;38:503–508. 15. Hasbrouck M, Nguyen TT. Acute management of atrial fibrillation in congestive heart failure  with reduced ejection fraction in the emergency department. Am J Emerg Med. 2022;58:39–42.  [PubMed: 35623182]  16. DiCarlo LA Jr, Morady F, de Buitleir M, et al. Effects of magnesium sulfate on cardiac conduction  and refractoriness in humans. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1986;7:1356–1362. [PubMed: 3711493]  7.2.2. Long-Term Rate Control 1. Scheuermeyer FX, Grafstein E, Stenstrom R, et al. Safety and efficiency of calcium channel  blockers versus beta-blockers for rate control in patients with atrial fibrillation and no acute  underlying medical illness. Acad Emerg Med. 2013;20:222–230. [PubMed: 23517253]  2. Zaman N, Naccarelli G, Foy A. A comparison of rate control agents for the treatment of  atrial fibrillation: follow-up investigation of the AFFIRM study. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol Ther.  2021;26:328–334. [PubMed: 33514292]  3. Lopes RD, Rordorf R, De Ferrari GM, et al. Digoxin and mortality in patients with atrial fibrillation.  J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018;71:1063–1074. [PubMed: 29519345]  4. Rathore SS, Curtis JP, Wang Y , et al. Association of serum digoxin concentration and outcomes in  patients with heart failure. JAMA. 2003;289:871–878. [PubMed: 12588271]  5. Adams KF Jr, Patterson JH, Gattis W A, et al. Relationship of serum digoxin concentration to  mortality and morbidity in women in the digitalis investigation group trial: a retrospective analysis.  J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;46:497–504. [PubMed: 16053964]  et al. Page 187 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

6. Ahmed A, Gambassi G, Weaver MT, et al. Effects of discontinuation of digoxin versus continuation  at low serum digoxin concentrations in chronic heart failure. Am J Cardiol. 2007;100:280–284.  [PubMed: 17631083]  7. Khand AU, Rankin AC, Martin W, et al. Carvedilol alone or in combination with digoxin for the  management of atrial fibrillation in patients with heart failure? J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;42:1944– 1951. [PubMed: 14662257]  8. Kotecha D, Bunting KV , Gill SK, et al. Effect of digoxin vs bisoprolol for heart rate control in  atrial fibrillation on patient-reported quality of life: the RATE-AF randomized clinical trial. JAMA.  2020;324:2497–2508. [PubMed: 33351042]  9. Ziff OJ, Lane DA, Samra M, et al. Safety and efficacy of digoxin: systematic review and metaanalysis of observational and controlled trial data. BMJ. 2015;351:h4451. [PubMed: 26321114]  10. Goldstein RE, Boccuzzi SJ, Cruess D, et al. Diltiazem increases late-onset congestive  heart failure in postinfarction patients with early reduction in ejection fraction The Adverse  Experience Committee; and the Multicenter Diltiazem Postinfarction Research Group. Circulation.  1991;83:52–60. [PubMed: 1984898]  11. Multicenter Diltiazem Postinfarction Trial Research Group. The effect of diltiazem on mortality  and reinfarction after myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 1988;319:385–392. [PubMed:  2899840]  12. Connolly SJ, Camm AJ, Halperin JL, et al. Dronedarone in high-risk permanent atrial fibrillation.  N Engl J Med. 2011;365:2268–2276. [PubMed: 22082198]  13. Ulimoen SR, Enger S, Carlson J, et al. Comparison of four single-drug regimens on ventricular  rate and arrhythmia-related symptoms in patients with permanent atrial fibrillation. Am J Cardiol.  2013;111:225–230. [PubMed: 23111138]  14. Nikolaidou T, Channer KS. Chronic atrial fibrillation: a systematic review of medical heart rate  control management. Postgrad Med J. 2009;85:303–312. [PubMed: 19528305]  15. Smith TW, Butler VP Jr, Haber E. Determination of therapeutic and toxic serum digoxin  concentrations by radioimmunoassay. N Engl J Med. 1969;281:1212–1216. [PubMed: 5388455]  16. Hauptman PJ, McCann P, Romero JM, et al. Reference laboratory values for digoxin following  publication of Digitalis Investigation Group (DIG) trial data. JAMA Intern Med. 2013;173:1552– 1554. [PubMed: 23797613]  17. Goldberger ZD, Goldberger AL. Therapeutic ranges of serum digoxin concentrations in patients  with heart failure. Am J Cardiol. 2012;109:1818–1821. [PubMed: 22502901]  18. Kober L, Torp-Pedersen C, McMurray JJ, et al. Increased mortality after dronedarone therapy for  severe heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:2678–2687. [PubMed: 18565860]  19. Hohnloser S, Crijns H, van Eickels M, et al. Effect of dronedarone on cardiovascular events in  atrial fibrillation. Rev Port Cardiol. 2009;28:345–347. 20. Davy JM, Herold M, Hoglund C, et al. Dronedarone for the control of ventricular rate in permanent  atrial fibrillation: the Efficacy and safety of dRonedArone for the cOntrol of ventricular rate during  atrial fibrillation (ERATO) study. Am Heart J. 2008;156:527.e521–527.e529. 7.3. Atrioventricular Nodal Ablation (AVNA) 1. Geelen P, Brugada J, Andries E, et al. Ventricular fibrillation and sudden death after radiofrequency  catheter ablation of the atrioventricular junction. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 1997;20:343–348.  [PubMed: 9058872]  2. Wang RX, Lee HC, Hodge DO, et al. Effect of pacing method on risk of sudden death after  atrioventricular node ablation and pacemaker implantation in patients with atrial fibrillation. Heart  Rhythm. 2013;10:696–701. [PubMed: 23333719]  3. Brignole M, Menozzi C, Gianfranchi L, et al. Assessment of atrioventricular junction ablation and  VVIR pacemaker versus pharmacological treatment in patients with heart failure and chronic atrial  fibrillation: a randomized, controlled study. Circulation. 1998;98:953–960. [PubMed: 9737514]  4. Lim KT, Davis MJ, Powell A, et al. Ablate and pace strategy for atrial fibrillation: long-term  outcome of AIRCRAFT trial. Europace. 2007;9:498–505. [PubMed: 17491103]  et al. Page 188 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

5. Wood MA, Brown-Mahoney C, Kay GN, et al. Clinical outcomes after ablation and pacing therapy  for atrial fibrillation: a meta-analysis. Circulation. 2000;101:1138–1144. [PubMed: 10715260]  6. Bradley DJ, Shen WK. Atrioventricular junction ablation combined with either right ventricular  pacing or cardiac resynchronization therapy for atrial fibrillation: the need for large-scale  randomized trials. Heart Rhythm. 2007;4:224–232. [PubMed: 17275763]  7. Udo EO, Zuithoff NP, van Hemel NM, et al. Incidence and predictors of short- and long-term  complications in pacemaker therapy: the FOLLOWPACE study. Heart Rhythm. 2012;9:728–735.  [PubMed: 22182495]  8. Armaganijan LV , Toff WD, Nielsen JC, et al. Are elderly patients at increased risk of  complications following pacemaker implantation? A meta-analysis of randomized trials. Pacing  Clin Electrophysiol. 2012;35:131–134. [PubMed: 22040168]  9. Baudo M, D'Ancona G, Trinca F, et al. Atrioventricular node ablation and pacing for atrial  tachyarrhythmias: a meta-analysis of postoperative outcomes. Int J Cardiol. 2022;363:80–86.  [PubMed: 35764203]  10. Vijayaraman P, Subzposh FA, Naperkowski A. Atrioventricular node ablation and His bundle  pacing. Europace. 2017;19:iv10–iv16. [PubMed: 29220422]  11. Morina-Vazquez P, Moraleda-Salas MT, Arce-Leon A, et al. Effectiveness and safety of A V node  ablation after His bundle pacing in patients with uncontrolled atrial arrhythmias. Pacing Clin  Electrophysiol. 2021;44:1004–1009. [PubMed: 33904179]  12. Pillai A, Kolominsky J, Koneru JN, et al. Atrioventricular junction ablation in patients with  conduction system pacing leads: a comparison of His-bundle vs left bundle branch area pacing  leads. Heart Rhythm. 2022;19:1116–1123. [PubMed: 35351624]  13. Vijayaraman P, Mathew AJ, Naperkowski A, et al. Conduction system pacing versus conventional  pacing in patients undergoing atrioventricular node ablation: nonrandomized, on-treatment  comparison. Heart Rhythm O2. 2022;3:368–376. [PubMed: 36097467]  14. Brignole M, Gianfranchi L, Menozzi C, et al. Atrioventricular junction ablation and pacemaker  therapy versus drug treatment in atrial fibrillation. Cardiol Rev. 1998;15:49–53. 15. Gillis AM, Connolly SJ, Lacombe P, et al. Randomized crossover comparison of DDDR versus  VDD pacing after atrioventricular junction ablation for prevention of atrial fibrillation. Circulation.  2000;102:736–741. [PubMed: 10942740]  16. D H, Novak P, O S. Survival of dual chamber pacing post atrioventricular nodal ablation in patients  with atrial fibrillation. Heart Rhythm. 2009;6:S406–S407. 17. Brignole M, Menozzi C, Gasparini M, et al. An evaluation of the strategy of maintenance of  sinus rhythm by antiarrhythmic drug therapy after ablation and pacing therapy in patients with  paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. Eur Heart J. 2002;23:892–900. [PubMed: 12042011]  18. Nowinski K, Gadler F, Jensen-Urstad M, et al. Transient proarrhythmic state following  atrioventricular junctional radiofrequency ablation. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2002;25:291–299.  [PubMed: 11990658]  19. Slotwiner DJ, Raitt MH, Del-Carpio Munoz F, et al. Impact of physiologic pacing versus right  ventricular pacing among patients with left ventricular ejection fraction greater than 35%: a  systematic review for the 2018 ACC/AHA/HRS guideline on the evaluation and management  of patients with bradycardia and cardiac conduction delay: a report of the American College of  Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart  Rhythm Society. Circulation. 2019;140:e483–e503. [PubMed: 30586773]  20. Olgin JE, Scheinman MM. Comparison of high energy direct current and radiofrequency  catheter ablation of the atrioventricular junction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1993;21:557–564. [PubMed:  8436734]  21. Kay GN, Ellenbogen KA, Giudici M, et al. The Ablate and Pace Trial: a prospective study  of catheter ablation of the A V conduction system and permanent pacemaker implantation for  treatment of atrial fibrillation APT Investigators. J Interv Card Electrophysiol. 1998;2:121–135.  [PubMed: 9870004]  22. Weerasooriya R, Davis M, Powell A, et al. The Australian Intervention Randomized Control of  Rate in Atrial Fibrillation Trial (AIRCRAFT). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;41:1697–1702. [PubMed:  12767649]  et al. Page 189 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

23. Redfield MM, Kay GN, Jenkins LS, et al. Tachycardia-related cardiomyopathy: a common cause  of ventricular dysfunction in patients with atrial fibrillation referred for atrioventricular ablation.  Mayo Clin Proc. 2000;75:790–795. [PubMed: 10943231]  24. Vijayaraman P, Hashimova N, Mathew AJ, et al. Simultaneous conduction system pacing and  atrioventricular node ablation via axillary vs femoral access. Heart Rhythm. 2022;19:1019–1021.  [PubMed: 35385717]  25. Bongiorni MG, Proclemer A, Dobreanu D, et al. Preferred tools and techniques for implantation  of cardiac electronic devices in Europe: results of the European Heart Rhythm Association survey.  Europace. 2013;15:1664–1668. [PubMed: 24170423]  26. Vernooy K, Dijkman B, Cheriex EC, et al. Ventricular remodeling during long-term right  ventricular pacing following His bundle ablation. Am J Cardiol. 2006;97:1223–1227. [PubMed:  16616030]  27. Doshi RN, Daoud EG, Fellows C, et al. Left ventricular-based cardiac stimulation post A V nodal  ablation evaluation (the PA VE study). J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2005;16:1160–1165. [PubMed:  16302897]  28. Chen L, Hodge D, Jahangir A, et al. Preserved left ventricular ejection fraction following  atrioventricular junction ablation and pacing for atrial fibrillation. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol.  2008;19:19–27. [PubMed: 17971146]  8.1. Goals of Therapy With Rhythm Control 1. Santhanakrishnan R, Wang N, Larson MG, et al. Atrial fibrillation begets heart failure and  vice versa: temporal associations and differences in preserved versus reduced ejection fraction.  Circulation. 2016;133:484–492. [PubMed: 26746177]  2. Hsu LF, Jais P, Sanders P, et al. Catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation in congestive heart failure. N  Engl J Med. 2004;351:2373–2383. [PubMed: 15575053]  3. Prabhu S, Costello BT, Taylor AJ, et al. Regression of diffuse ventricular fibrosis following  restoration of sinus rhythm with catheter ablation in patients with atrial fibrillation and systolic  dysfunction: a substudy of the CAMERA MRI trial. JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2018;4:999–1007.  [PubMed: 30139501]  4. Stronati G, Guerra F, Urbinati A, et al. Tachycardiomyopathy in patients without underlying  structural heart disease. J Clin Med. 2019;8:1411. [PubMed: 31500364]  5. Jeong YH, Choi KJ, Song JM, et al. Diagnostic approach and treatment strategy in tachycardiainduced cardiomyopathy. Clin Cardiol. 2008;31:172–178. [PubMed: 18404727]  6. Marcusohn E, Postnikov M, Kobo O, et al. Factors associated with left ventricular function recovery  in patients with atrial fibrillation related cardiomyopathy. Isr Med Assoc J. 2022;24:101–106.  [PubMed: 35187899]  7. Cooper HA, Bloomfield DA, Bush DE, et al. Relation between achieved heart rate and outcomes  in patients with atrial fibrillation (from the Atrial Fibrillation Follow-up Investigation of Rhythm  Management [AFFIRM] Study). Am J Cardiol. 2004;93:1247–1253. [PubMed: 15135698]  8. Miura K, Ikemura N, Kimura T, et al. Treatment strategies and subsequent changes in the patientreported quality-of-life among elderly patients with atrial fibrillation. Am Heart J. 2020;222:83–92.  [PubMed: 32028139]  9. Kosior DA, Szulc M, Rosiak M, et al. Functional status with rhythm- versus rate-control strategy for  persistent atrial fibrillation. Pol Arch Intern Med. 2018;128:658–666. [PubMed: 30113568]  10. Van Gelder IC, Groenveld HF, Crijns HJ, et al. Lenient versus strict rate control in patients with  atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:1363–1373. [PubMed: 20231232]  11. Andrade JG, Wells GA, Deyell MW, et al. Cryoablation or drug therapy for initial treatment of  atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2021;384:305–315. [PubMed: 33197159]  12. Kirchhof P, Camm AJ, Goette A, et al. Early rhythm-control therapy in patients with atrial  fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2020;383:1305–1316. [PubMed: 32865375]  13. Kim D, Yang PS, You SC, et al. Treatment timing and the effects of rhythm control strategy  in patients with atrial fibrillation: nationwide cohort study. BMJ. 2021;373:n991. [PubMed:  33975876]  et al. Page 190 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

14. Dickow J, Kirchhof P, Van Houten HK, et al. Generalizability of the EAST-AFNET 4 Trial:  assessing outcomes of early rhythm-control therapy in patients with atrial fibrillation. J Am Heart  Assoc. 2022;11:1–11. 15. Roy D, Talajic M, Nattel S, et al. Rhythm control versus rate control for atrial fibrillation and heart  failure. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:2667–2677. [PubMed: 18565859]  16. Rillig A, Magnussen C, Ozga AK, et al. Early rhythm control therapy in patients with atrial  fibrillation and heart failure. Circulation. 2021;144:845–858. [PubMed: 34328366]  17. Marrouche NF, Brachmann J, Andresen D, et al. Catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation with heart  failure. N Engl J Med. 2018;378:417–427. [PubMed: 29385358]  18. Di Biase L, Mohanty P, Mohanty S, et al. Ablation versus amiodarone for treatment of persistent  atrial fibrillation in patients with congestive heart failure and an implanted device: results from the  AATAC multicenter randomized trial. Circulation. 2016;133:1637–1644. [PubMed: 27029350]  19. Packer DL, Piccini JP, Monahan KH, et al. Ablation versus drug therapy for atrial fibrillation  in heart failure: results from the CABANA trial. Circulation. 2021;143:1377–1390. [PubMed:  33554614]  20. Veasey RA, Sugihara C, Sandhu K, et al. The natural history of atrial fibrillation in patients with  permanent pacemakers: is atrial fibrillation a progressive disease? J Interv Card Electrophysiol.  2015;44:23–30. [PubMed: 26139311]  21. Holmqvist F, Kim S, Steinberg BA, et al. Heart rate is associated with progression of atrial  fibrillation, independent of rhythm. Heart. 2015;101:894–899. [PubMed: 25732748]  22. Zhang YY , Qiu C, Davis PJ, et al. Predictors of progression of recently diagnosed atrial  fibrillation in REgistry on Cardiac Rhythm DisORDers Assessing the Control of Atrial Fibrillation  (RecordAF)-United States cohort. Am J Cardiol. 2013;112:79–84. [PubMed: 23561591]  23. De V os CB, Breithardt G, Camm AJ, et al. Progression of atrial fibrillation in the REgistry on  Cardiac rhythm disORDers assessing the control of Atrial Fibrillation cohort: clinical correlates  and the effect of rhythm-control therapy. Am Heart J. 2012;163:887–893. [PubMed: 22607868]  24. Blum S, Aeschbacher S, Meyre P, et al. Incidence and predictors of atrial fibrillation progression. J  Am Heart Assoc. 2019;8:e012554. [PubMed: 31590581]  25. Pathak RK, Middeldorp ME, Meredith M, et al. Long-term effect of goal-directed weight  management in an atrial fibrillation cohort: a long-term follow-up study (LEGACY). J Am Coll  Cardiol. 2015;65:2159–2169. [PubMed: 25792361]  26. Koldenhof T, Wijtvliet PEPJ, Pluymaekers NAHA, et al. Rate control drugs differ in the prevention  of progression of atrial fibrillation. EP: Europace. 2022;24:384–389. [PubMed: 34414430]  27. Yang WY , Du X, Fawzy AM, et al. Associations of atrial fibrillation progression with clinical  risk factors and clinical prognosis: a report from the Chinese Atrial Fibrillation Registry study. J  Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2021;32:333–341. [PubMed: 33269504]  28. Kalman JM, Sanders P, Rosso R, et al. Should we perform catheter ablation for asymptomatic atrial  fibrillation? Circulation. 2017;136:490–499. [PubMed: 28760871]  29. Sgreccia D, Manicardi M, Malavasi VL, et al. Comparing outcomes in asymptomatic and  symptomatic atrial fibrillation: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 81 462 patients. J Clin  Med. 2021;10:3979. [PubMed: 34501434]  30. Willems S, Borof K, Brandes A, et al. Systematic, early rhythm control strategy for atrial  fibrillation in patients with or without symptoms: the EAST-AFNET 4 trial. Eur Heart J.  2022;43:1219–1230. [PubMed: 34447995]  31. Ganapathy A V , Monjazeb S, Ganapathy KS, et al. “Asymptomatic” persistent or permanent  atrial fibrillation: a misnomer in selected patients. Int J Cardiol. 2015;185:112–113. [PubMed:  25791105]  32. Hermans ANL, Pluymaekers N, Lankveld TAR, et al. Clinical utility of rhythm control by  electrical cardioversion to assess the association between selfreported symptoms and rhythm status  in patients with persistent atrial fibrillation. Int J Cardiol Heart Vasc. 2021;36:100870. [PubMed:  34568541]  33. Senoo K, Suzuki S, Otsuka T, et al. Progression to the persistent form in asymptomatic paroxysmal  atrial fibrillation. Circ J. 2014;78:1121–1126. [PubMed: 24553324]  et al. Page 191 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

34. Disertori M, Lombardi F, Barlera S, et al. Clinical characteristics of patients with asymptomatic  recurrences of atrial fibrillation in the Gruppo Italiano per lo Studio della Sopravvivenza  nell'Infarto Miocardico-Atrial Fibrillation (GISSI-AF) trial. Am Heart J. 2011;162:382–389.  [PubMed: 21835301]  35. Bodagh N, Yap R, Kotadia I, et al. Impact of catheter ablation versus medical therapy on cognitive  function in atrial fibrillation: a systematic review. J Interv Card Electrophysiol. 2022;65:271–296.  [PubMed: 35380337]  36. Kim D, Yang PS, You SC, et al. Association of rhythm control with incident dementia  among patients with atrial fibrillation: a nationwide population-based cohort study. Age Ageing.  2022;51:1–9. 37. Bunch TJ, Crandall BG, Weiss JP, et al. Patients treated with catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation  have long-term rates of death, stroke, and dementia similar to patients without atrial fibrillation. J  Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2011;22:839–845. [PubMed: 21410581]  38. Slee A, Saksena S. Impact of initial heart failure emergence on clinical outcomes of atrial  fibrillation patients in the AFFIRM trial. Am Heart J. 2020;220:1–11. [PubMed: 31756389]  39. Gertz ZM, Raina A, Saghy L, et al. Evidence of atrial functional mitral regurgitation due to atrial  fibrillation: reversal with arrhythmia control. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;58:1474–1481. [PubMed:  21939832]  40. Reddy ST, Belden W, Doyle M, et al. Mitral regurgitation recovery and atrial reverse remodeling  following pulmonary vein isolation procedure in patients with atrial fibrillation: a clinical  observation proof-of-concept cardiac MRI study. J Interv Card Electrophysiol. 2013;37:307–315.  [PubMed: 23512117]  41. Abe Y , Takahashi Y , Shibata T. Looking into the mechanistic link between mitral regurgitation and  atrial fibrillation. Cardiol Clin. 2021;39:281–288. [PubMed: 33894941]  42. Soulat-Dufour L, Lang S, Addetia K, et al. Restoring sinus rhythm reverses cardiac remodeling and  reduces valvular regurgitation in patients with atrial fibrillation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2022;79:951– 961. [PubMed: 35272799]  43. Markman TM, Plappert T, De Feria Alsina A, et al. Improvement in tricuspid regurgitation  following catheter ablation of atrial fibrillation. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2020;31:2883–2888.  [PubMed: 32757450]  44. Pype L, Embrechts L, Cornez B, et al. Long-term effect of atrial fibrillation on the evolution of  mitral and tricuspid valve regurgitation. Acta Cardiol. 2020;75:639–647. [PubMed: 31403908]  45. Wang J, Han J, Li Y , et al. Impact of Surgical ablation of atrial fibrillation on the progression  of tricuspid regurgitation and right-sided heart remodeling after mitral-valve surgery: a propensityscore matching analysis. J Am Heart Assoc. 2016;5:e004213. [PubMed: 27919928]  46. Lin PL, Huang CC, Wu YJ, et al. Relations between baseline burden, maximum duration, and  relative reduction of atrial fibrillation: insights from continuous monitoring in rhythm control. J  Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2019;30:178–182. [PubMed: 30575199]  47. Chew DS, Jones KA, Loring Z, et al. Diagnosis-to-ablation time predicts recurrent atrial fibrillation  and rehospitalization following catheter ablation. Heart Rhythm O2. 2022;3:23–31. [PubMed:  35243432]  48. Chung MK, Eckhardt LL, Chen LY , et al. Lifestyle and risk factor modification for reduction  of atrial fibrillation: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation.  2020;141:e750–e772. [PubMed: 32148086]  49. Gopinathannair R, Chen LY , Chung MK, et al. Managing atrial fibrillation in patients with heart  failure and reduced ejection fraction: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association.  Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2021;14:e000078. 50. Hagens VE, Ranchor A V , Van Sonderen E, et al. Effect of rate or rhythm control on quality of  life in persistent atrial fibrillation. Results from the Rate Control Versus Electrical Cardioversion  (RACE) Study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;43:241–247. [PubMed: 14736444]  51. Ha AC, Breithardt G, Camm AJ, et al. Health-related quality of life in patients with  atrial fibrillation treated with rhythm control versus rate control: insights from a prospective  international registry (Registry on Cardiac Rhythm Disorders Assessing the Control of Atrial  et al. Page 192 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Fibrillation: RECORD-AF). Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2014;7:896–904. [PubMed:  25387780]  52. Govindapillai A, Cox JL, Thabane L, et al. Rhythm control vs rate control in a contemporary  ambulatory atrial fibrillation cohort: post hoc analysis of the IMPACT-AF trial. CJC Open.  2022;4:551–557. [PubMed: 35734517]  53. Wu L, Lu Y , Zheng L, et al. Comparison of radiofrequency catheter ablation between  asymptomatic and symptomatic persistent atrial fibrillation: a propensity score matched analysis. J  Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2016;27:531–535. [PubMed: 26773415]  54. Mohanty S, Santangeli P, Mohanty P, et al. Catheter ablation of asymptomatic longstanding  persistent atrial fibrillation: impact on quality of life, exercise performance, arrhythmia perception,  and arrhythmia-free survival. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2014;25:1057–1064. [PubMed:  24903064]  55. Suman-Horduna I, Roy D, Frasure-Smith N, et al. Quality of life and functional capacity in  patients with atrial fibrillation and congestive heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61:455–460.  [PubMed: 23265334]  56. Hsu LF, Jaïs P, Sanders P, et al. Catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation in congestive heart failure. N  Engl J Med. 2004;351:2373–2383. [PubMed: 15575053]  57. Parkash R, Wells GA, Rouleau J, et al. Randomized ablation-based rhythm-control versus ratecontrol trial in patients with heart failure and atrial fibrillation: results from the RAFT-AF trial.  Circulation. 2022;145:1693–1704. [PubMed: 35313733]  58. Chiou WR, Lin PL, Huang CC, et al. Rhythm control without catheter ablation may have  benefits beyond stroke prevention in rivaroxaban-treated non-permanent atrial fibrillation. Sci Rep.  2022;12:3745. [PubMed: 35260615]  59. January CT, Wann LS, Alpert JS, et al. 2014 AHA/ACC/HRS guideline for the management  of patients with atrial fibrillation: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American  Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. Circulation.  2019;140:e125–e151. [PubMed: 30686041]  8.2. Electrical and Pharmacologic Cardioversion 1. Crijns HJ, Weijs B, Fairley AM, et al. Contemporary real life cardioversion of atrial fibrillation:  Results from the multinational RHYTHM-AF study. Int J Cardiol. 2014;172:588–594. [PubMed:  24556445]  2. Hernandez-Madrid A, Svendsen JH, Lip GY , et al. Cardioversion for atrial fibrillation in  current European practice: results of the European Heart Rhythm Association survey. Europace.  2013;15:915–918. [PubMed: 23709570]  3. Pisters R, Nieuwlaat R, Prins MH, et al. Clinical correlates of immediate success and outcome at  1-year follow-up of real-world cardioversion of atrial fibrillation: the Euro Heart Survey. Europace.  2012;14:666–674. [PubMed: 22223715]  4. Stiell IG, Clement CM, Brison RJ, et al. Variation in management of recent-onset atrial fibrillation  and flutter among academic hospital emergency departments. Ann Emerg Med. 2011;57:13–21.  [PubMed: 20864213]  5. Dankner R, Shahar A, Novikov I, et al. Treatment of stable atrial fibrillation in the emergency  department: a population-based comparison of electrical direct-current versus pharmacological  cardioversion or conservative management. Cardiology. 2009;112:270–278. [PubMed: 18815445]  6. Brandes A, Crijns H, Rienstra M, et al. Cardioversion of atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter revisited:  current evidence and practical guidance for a common procedure. Europace. 2020;22:1149–1161.  [PubMed: 32337542]  7. Lip GY , Gitt AK, Le Heuzey JY , et al. Overtreatment and undertreatment with anticoagulation  in relation to cardioversion of atrial fibrillation (the RHYTHM-AF study). Am J Cardiol.  2014;113:480–484. [PubMed: 24332698]  8. Airaksinen KE, Grönberg T, Nuotio I, et al. Thromboembolic complications after cardioversion  of acute atrial fibrillation: the FinCV (Finnish CardioVersion) study. J Am Coll Cardiol.  2013;62:1187–1192. [PubMed: 23850908]  et al. Page 193 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

8.2.1. Prevention of Thromboembolism in the Setting of Cardioversion 1. Klein AL, Grimm RA, Murray RD, et al. Use of transesophageal echocardiography to guide  cardioversion in patients with atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2001;344:1411–1420. [PubMed:  11346805]  2. Fatkin D, Kuchar DL, Thorburn CW, et al. Transesophageal echocardiography before and during  direct current cardioversion of atrial fibrillation: evidence for “atrial stunning” as a mechanism of  thromboembolic complications. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1994;23:307–316. [PubMed: 8294679]  3. Grimm RA, Stewart WJ, Maloney JD, et al. Impact of electrical cardioversion for atrial fibrillation  on left atrial appendage function and spontaneous echo contrast: characterization by simultaneous  transesophageal echocardiography. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1993;22:1359–1366. [PubMed: 8227792]  4. Manning WJ, Leeman DE, Gotch PJ, et al. Pulsed Doppler evaluation of atrial mechanical function  after electrical cardioversion of atrial fibrillation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1989;13:617–623. [PubMed:  2918167]  5. Manning WJ, Silverman DI, Katz SE, et al. Impaired left atrial mechanical function after  cardioversion: relation to the duration of atrial fibrillation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1994;23:1535–1540.  [PubMed: 8195510]  6. Berger M, Schweitzer P. Timing of thromboembolic events after electrical cardioversion of atrial  fibrillation or flutter: a retrospective analysis. Am J Cardiol. 1998;82:1545–1547. A1548. [PubMed:  9874066]  7. McIntyre WF, Connolly SJ, Wang J, et al. Thromboembolic events around the time of cardioversion  for atrial fibrillation in patients receiving antiplatelet treatment in the ACTIVE trials. Eur Heart J.  2019;40:3026–3032. [PubMed: 31377776]  8. Lip GY , Hammerstingl C, Marin F, et al. Left atrial thrombus resolution in atrial fibrillation or  flutter: results of a prospective study with rivaroxaban (X-TRA) and a retrospective observational  registry providing baseline data (CLOT-AF). Am Heart J. 2016;178:126–134. [PubMed: 27502860]  9. Aryana A, Singh SK, Singh SM, et al. Association between incomplete surgical ligation of left atrial  appendage and stroke and systemic embolization. Heart Rhythm. 2015;12:1431–1437. [PubMed:  25998141]  10. Mohanty S, Gianni C, Trivedi C, et al. Risk of thromboembolic events after percutaneous left  atrial appendage ligation in patients with atrial fibrillation: long-term results of a multicenter study.  Heart Rhythm. 2020;17:175–181. [PubMed: 31400519]  11. Alkhouli M, Du C, Killu A, et al. Clinical impact of residual leaks following left atrial appendage  occlusion: insights from the NCDR LAAO registry. JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2022;8:766–778.  [PubMed: 35387751]  12. Viles-Gonzalez JF, Kar S, Douglas P, et al. The clinical impact of incomplete left atrial  appendage closure with the Watchman Device in patients with atrial fibrillation: a PROTECT  AF (Percutaneous Closure of the Left Atrial Appendage Versus Warfarin Therapy for Prevention  of Stroke in Patients With Atrial Fibrillation) substudy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59:923–929.  [PubMed: 22381428]  13. Boersma LV , Ince H, Kische S, et al. Efficacy and safety of left atrial appendage closure  with W ATCHMAN in patients with or without contraindication to oral anticoagulation: 1-Year  follow-up outcome data of the EWOLUTION trial. Heart Rhythm. 2017;14:1302–1308. [PubMed:  28577840]  14. Afzal MR, Gabriels JK, Jackson GG, et al. Temporal changes and clinical implications of delayed  peridevice leak following left atrial appendage closure. JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2022;8:15–25.  [PubMed: 34454881]  15. Fauchier L, Cinaud A, Brigadeau F, et al. Device-related thrombosis after percutaneous left atrial  appendage occlusion for atrial fibrillation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018;71:1528–1536. [PubMed:  29622159]  16. Alkhouli M, Busu T, Shah K, et al. Incidence and clinical impact of device-related thrombus  following percutaneous left atrial appendage occlusion: a meta-analysis. JACC: Clinical  Electrophysiology. 2018;4:1629–1637. [PubMed: 30573129]  et al. Page 194 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

17. Dukkipati SR, Kar S, Holmes DR, et al. Device-related thrombus after left atrial appendage  closure: incidence, predictors, and outcomes. Circulation. 2018;138:874–885. [PubMed:  29752398]  18. Simard T, Jung RG, Lehenbauer K, et al. Predictors of device-related thrombus following  percutaneous left atrial appendage occlusion. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021;78:297–313. [PubMed:  34294267]  19. Kubo S, Mizutani Y , Meemook K, et al. Incidence, characteristics, and clinical course of devicerelated thrombus after Watchman left atrial appendage occlusion device implantation in atrial  fibrillation patients. JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2017;3:1380–1386. [PubMed: 29759668]  20. Sharma SP, Turagam MK, Gopinathannair R, et al. Direct current cardioversion of atrial fibrillation  in patients with left atrial appendage occlusion devices. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;74:2267–2274.  [PubMed: 31672183]  21. Nuotio I, Hartikainen JE, Gronberg T, et al. Time to cardioversion for acute atrial fibrillation and  thromboembolic complications. JAMA. 2014;312:647–649. [PubMed: 25117135]  22. Grönberg T, Hartikainen JE, Nuotio I, et al. Anticoagulation, CHA2DS2V ASc score, and  thromboembolic risk of cardioversion of acute atrial fibrillation (from the FinCV study). Am J  Cardiol. 2016;117:1294–1298. [PubMed: 26892448]  23. Lip GY , Gitt AK, Le Heuzey JY , et al. Overtreatment and undertreatment with anticoagulation  in relation to cardioversion of atrial fibrillation (the RHYTHM-AF study). Am J Cardiol.  2014;113:480–484. [PubMed: 24332698]  24. Airaksinen KE, Grönberg T, Nuotio I, et al. Thromboembolic complications after cardioversion  of acute atrial fibrillation: the FinCV (Finnish CardioVersion) study. J Am Coll Cardiol.  2013;62:1187–1192. [PubMed: 23850908]  25. Lip GY . Cardioversion of atrial fibrillation. Postgrad Med J. 1995;71:457–465. [PubMed:  7567751]  26. Cappato R, Ezekowitz MD, Klein AL, et al. Rivaroxaban vs vitamin K antagonists for  cardioversion in atrial fibrillation. Eur Heart J. 2014;35:3346–3355. [PubMed: 25182247]  27. Ezekowitz MD, Pollack CV Jr, Halperin JL, et al. Apixaban compared to heparin/vitamin K  antagonist in patients with atrial fibrillation scheduled for cardioversion: the EMANATE trial. Eur  Heart J. 2018;39:2959–2971. [PubMed: 29659797]  28. Goette A, Merino JL, Ezekowitz MD, et al. Edoxaban versus enoxaparin-warfarin in patients  undergoing cardioversion of atrial fibrillation (ENSURE-AF): a randomised, open-label, phase 3b  trial. Lancet. 2016;388:1995–2003. [PubMed: 27590218]  29. Kotecha D, Pollack CV Jr, De Caterina R, et al. Direct oral anticoagulants halve thromboembolic  events after cardioversion of AF compared with warfarin. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018;72:1984–1986.  [PubMed: 30309478]  30. Lown B Electrical reversion of cardiac arrhythmias. Br Heart J. 1967;29:469–489. [PubMed:  6029120]  31. DeSilva RA, Graboys TB, Podrid PJ, et al. Cardioversion and defibrillation. Am Heart J.  1980;100:881–895. [PubMed: 7004155]  32. Spagnolo P, Giglio M, Di Marco D, et al. Diagnosis of left atrial appendage thrombus in patients  with atrial fibrillation: delayed contrast-enhanced cardiac CT. Eur Radiol. 2021;31:1236–1244.  [PubMed: 32886202]  33. Romero J, Husain SA, Kelesidis I, et al. Detection of left atrial appendage thrombus by  cardiac computed tomography in patients with atrial fibrillation: a meta-analysis. Circ Cardiovasc  Imaging. 2013;6:185–194. [PubMed: 23406625]  34. Pathan F, Hecht H, Narula J, et al. Roles of transesophageal echocardiography and cardiac  computed tomography for evaluation of left atrial thrombus and associated pathology: a review  and critical analysis. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2018;11:616–627. [PubMed: 29622180]  35. Black IW, Fatkin D, Sagar KB, et al. Exclusion of atrial thrombus by transesophageal  echocardiography does not preclude embolism after cardioversion of atrial fibrillation. A  multicenter study. Circulation. 1994;89:2509–2513. [PubMed: 8205657]  et al. Page 195 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

36. Tieleman RG, Van Gelder IC, Crijns HJ, et al. Early recurrences of atrial fibrillation after electrical  cardioversion: a result of fibrillation-induced electrical remodeling of the atria? J Am Coll Cardiol.  1998;31:167–173. [PubMed: 9426036]  37. Harjai KJ, Mobarek SK, Cheirif J, et al. Clinical variables affecting recovery of left atrial  mechanical function after cardioversion from atrial fibrillation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1997;30:481– 486. [PubMed: 9247522]  38. Spartera M, Stracquadanio A, Pessoa-Amorim G, et al. The impact of atrial fibrillation and stroke  risk factors on left atrial blood flow characteristics. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2021;23:115– 123. [PubMed: 34687541]  39. Korsholm K, Jensen JM, Nørgaard BL, et al. Detection of device-related thrombosis  following left atrial appendage occlusion: a comparison between cardiac computed tomography  and transesophageal echocardiography. Circ Cardiovasc Interv. 2019;12:e008112. [PubMed:  31514523]  40. Berte B, Jost CA, Maurer D, et al. Long-term follow-up after left atrial appendage occlusion with  comparison of transesophageal echocardiography versus computed tomography to guide medical  therapy and data about postclosure cardioversion. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2017;28:1140– 1150. [PubMed: 28675629]  41. Saw J, Fahmy P, DeJong P, et al. Cardiac CT angiography for device surveillance after  endovascular left atrial appendage closure. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2015;16:1198–1206.  [PubMed: 25851318]  42. Garg A, Khunger M, Seicean S, et al. Incidence of thromboembolic complications within 30  days of electrical cardioversion performed within 48 hours of atrial fibrillation onset. JACC Clin  Electrophysiol. 2016;2:487–494. [PubMed: 29759870]  43. Wong BM, Perry JJ, Cheng W, et al. Thromboembolic events following cardioversion of acute  atrial fibrillation and flutter: a systematic review and meta-analysis. CJEM. 2021;23:500–511.  [PubMed: 33715143]  8.2.2. Electrical Cardioversion 1. Dankner R, Shahar A, Novikov I, et al. Treatment of stable atrial fibrillation in the emergency  department: a population-based comparison of electrical direct-current versus pharmacological  cardioversion or conservative management. Cardiology. 2009;112:270–278. [PubMed: 18815445]  2. Stiell IG, Sivilotti MLA, Taljaard M, et al. Electrical versus pharmacological cardioversion for  emergency department patients with acute atrial fibrillation (RAFF2): a partial factorial randomised  trial. Lancet. 2020;395:339–349. [PubMed: 32007169]  3. Lown B Electrical reversion of cardiac arrhythmias. Br Heart J. 1967;29:469–489. [PubMed:  6029120]  4. Mittal S, Ayati S, Stein KM, et al. Transthoracic cardioversion of atrial fibrillation: comparison  of rectilinear biphasic versus damped sine wave monophasic shocks. Circulation. 2000;101:1282– 1287. [PubMed: 10725288]  5. Schmidt AS, Lauridsen KG, Torp P, et al. Maximum-fixed energy shocks for cardioverting atrial  fibrillation. Eur Heart J. 2020;41:626–631. [PubMed: 31504412]  6. Crijns HJ, Weijs B, Fairley AM, et al. Contemporary real life cardioversion of atrial fibrillation:  results from the multinational RHYTHM-AF study. Int J Cardiol. 2014;172:588–594. [PubMed:  24556445]  7. Kirchhof P, Eckardt L, Loh P, et al. Anterior-posterior versus anterior-lateral electrode positions  for external cardioversion of atrial fibrillation: a randomised trial. Lancet. 2002;360:1275–1279.  [PubMed: 12414201]  8. Um KJ, McIntyre WF, Healey JS, et al. Pre- and post-treatment with amiodarone for elective  electrical cardioversion of atrial fibrillation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Europace.  2019;21:856–863. [PubMed: 30875422]  9. Oral H, Souza JJ, Michaud GF, et al. Facilitating transthoracic cardioversion of atrial fibrillation  with ibutilide pretreatment. N Engl J Med. 1999;340:1849–1854. [PubMed: 10369847]  et al. Page 196 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

10. V oskoboinik A, Moskovitch J, Plunkett G, et al. Cardioversion of atrial fibrillation in  obese patients: results from the Cardioversion-BMI randomized controlled trial. J Cardiovasc  Electrophysiol. 2019;30:155–161. [PubMed: 30375104]  11. Stiell IG, Clement CM, Brison RJ, et al. Variation in management of recent-onset atrial fibrillation  and flutter among academic hospital emergency departments. Ann Emerg Med. 2011;57:13–21.  [PubMed: 20864213]  12. Hindricks G, Potpara T, Dagres N, et al. 2020 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and management of  atrial fibrillation. Developed in collaboration with the European Association for Cardio-Thoracic  Surgery (EACTS): the Task Force for the diagnosis and management of atrial fibrillation of the  European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Developed with the special contribution of the European  Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA) of the ESC. Eur Heart J. 2021;42:373–498. [PubMed:  32860505]  13. Hernandez-Madrid A, Svendsen JH, Lip GY , et al. Cardioversion for atrial fibrillation in  current European practice: results of the European Heart Rhythm Association survey. Europace.  2013;15:915–918. [PubMed: 23709570]  14. Pisters R, Nieuwlaat R, Prins MH, et al. Clinical correlates of immediate success and outcome at 1year follow-up of real-world cardioversion of atrial fibrillation: the Euro Heart Survey. Europace.  2012;14:666–674. [PubMed: 22223715]  15. Burton JH, Vinson DR, Drummond K, et al. Electrical cardioversion of emergency department  patients with atrial fibrillation. Ann Emerg Med. 2004;44:20–30. [PubMed: 15226705]  16. Cristoni L, Tampieri A, Mucci F, et al. Cardioversion of acute atrial fibrillation in the short  observation unit: comparison of a protocol focused on electrical cardioversion with simple  antiarrhythmic treatment. Emerg Med J. 2011;28:932–937. [PubMed: 20947916]  17. Jacoby JL, Cesta M, Heller MB, et al. Synchronized emergency department cardioversion of  atrial dysrhythmias saves time, money and resources. J Emerg Med. 2005;28:27–30. [PubMed:  15657000]  18. Lo GK, Fatovich DM, Haig AD. Biphasic cardioversion of acute atrial fibrillation in the emergency  department. Emerg Med J. 2006;23:51–53. [PubMed: 16373804]  19. Brandes A, Crijns H, Rienstra M, et al. Cardioversion of atrial fibrillation and atrial  flutter revisited: current evidence and practical guidance for a common procedure. Europace.  2020;22:1149–1161. [PubMed: 32337542]  20. Gronberg T, Nuotio I, Nikkinen M, et al. Arrhythmic complications after electrical cardioversion of  acute atrial fibrillation: the FinCV study. Europace. 2013;15:1432–1435. [PubMed: 23687124]  21. Botkin SB, Dhanekula LS, Olshansky B. Outpatient cardioversion of atrial arrhythmias: efficacy,  safety, and costs. Am Heart J. 2003;145:233–238. [PubMed: 12595839]  22. Lewis SR, Nicholson A, Reed SS, et al. Anaesthetic and sedative agents used for electrical  cardioversion. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;3:CD010824. 23. Ebrahimi R, Rubin SA. Electrical cardioversion resulting in death from synchronization failure.  Am J Cardiol. 1994;74:100–102. [PubMed: 8017296]  24. Ikeda S, An Y , Yanagisawa M, et al. Iatrogenic ventricular fibrillation caused by inappropriately  synchronized cardioversion in a patient with pre-excited atrial fibrillation: a case report. J Cardiol  Cases. 2021;23:31–34. [PubMed: 33437337]  25. Kaufmann MR, McKillop MS, Burkart TA, et al. Iatrogenic ventricular fibrillation after  direct-current cardioversion of preexcited atrial fibrillation caused by inadvertent T-wave  synchronization. Tex Heart Inst J. 2018;45:39–41. [PubMed: 29556151]  26. Squara F, Elbaum C, Garret G, et al. Active compression versus standard anterior-posterior  defibrillation for external cardioversion of atrial fibrillation: a prospective randomized study. Heart  Rhythm. 2021;18:360–365. [PubMed: 33181323]  27. Lévy S, Lauribe P, Dolla E, et al. A randomized comparison of external and internal cardioversion  of chronic atrial fibrillation. Circulation. 1992;86:1415–1420. [PubMed: 1423954]  et al. Page 197 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

8.2.3. Pharmacological Cardioversion 1. Dankner R, Shahar A, Novikov I, et al. Treatment of stable atrial fibrillation in the emergency  department: a population-based comparison of electrical direct-current versus pharmacological  cardioversion or conservative management. Cardiology. 2009;112:270–278. [PubMed: 18815445]  2. Stambler BS, Wood MA, Ellenbogen KA, et al. Efficacy and safety of repeated intravenous  doses of ibutilide for rapid conversion of atrial flutter or fibrillation Ibutilide Repeat Dose Study  Investigators. Circulation. 1996;94:1613–1621. [PubMed: 8840852]  3. Ellenbogen KA, Stambler BS, Wood MA, et al. Efficacy of intravenous ibutilide for rapid  termination of atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter: a dose-response study. J Am Coll Cardiol.  1996;28:130–136. [PubMed: 8752805]  4. Hou ZY , Chang MS, Chen CY , et al. Acute treatment of recent-onset atrial fibrillation and flutter  with a tailored dosing regimen of intravenous amiodarone A randomized, digoxin-controlled study.  Eur Heart J. 1995;16:521–528. [PubMed: 7671898]  5. Kochiadakis GE, Igoumenidis NE, Simantirakis EN, et al. Intravenous propafenone versus  intravenous amiodarone in the management of atrial fibrillation of recent onset: a placebo-controlled  study. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 1998;21:2475–2479. [PubMed: 9825370]  6. Cotter G, Blatt A, Kaluski E, et al. Conversion of recent onset paroxysmal atrial fibrillation to  normal sinus rhythm: the effect of no treatment and high-dose amiodarone A randomized, placebocontrolled study. Eur Heart J. 1999;20:1833–1842. [PubMed: 10581142]  7. Vardas PE, Kochiadakis GE, Igoumenidis NE, et al. Amiodarone as a first-choice drug for  restoring sinus rhythm in patients with atrial fibrillation: a randomized, controlled study. Chest.  2000;117:1538–1545. [PubMed: 10858380]  8. Chevalier P, Durand-Dubief A, Burri H, et al. Amiodarone versus placebo and class Ic drugs for  cardioversion of recent-onset atrial fibrillation: a meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;41:255– 262. [PubMed: 12535819]  9. Capucci A, Lenzi T, Boriani G, et al. Effectiveness of loading oral flecainide for converting  recent-onset atrial fibrillation to sinus rhythm in patients without organic heart disease or with only  systemic hypertension. Am J Cardiol. 1992;70:69–72. [PubMed: 1615873]  10. Capucci A, Boriani G, Botto GL, et al. Conversion of recent-onset atrial fibrillation by a single oral  loading dose of propafenone or flecainide. Am J Cardiol. 1994;74:503–505. [PubMed: 8059737]  11. Ibrahim OA, Belley-Côté EP, Um KJ, et al. Single-dose oral anti-arrhythmic drugs for  cardioversion of recent-onset atrial fibrillation: a systematic review and network meta-analysis  of randomized controlled trials. Europace. 2021;23:1200–1210. [PubMed: 33723602]  12. Botto GL, Capucci A, Bonini W, et al. Conversion of recent onset atrial fibrillation to sinus rhythm  using a single oral loading dose of propafenone: comparison of two regimens. Int J Cardiol.  1997;58:55–61. [PubMed: 9021428]  13. Boriani G, Biffi M, Capucci A, et al. Oral propafenone to convert recent-onset atrial fibrillation in  patients with and without underlying heart disease: a randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med.  1997;126:621–625. [PubMed: 9103129]  14. Azpitarte J, Alvarez M, Baún O, et al. Value of single oral loading dose of propafenone in  converting recent-onset atrial fibrillation. Results of a randomized, double-blind, controlled study.  Eur Heart J. 1997;18:1649–1654. [PubMed: 9347277]  15. Brembilla-Perrot B, Houriez P, Beurrier D, et al. Predictors of atrial flutter with 1:1 conduction  in patients treated with class I antiarrhythmic drugs for atrial tachyarrhythmias. Int J Cardiol.  2001;80:7–15. [PubMed: 11532541]  16. Alboni P, Botto GL, Baldi N, et al. Outpatient treatment of recent-onset atrial fibrillation with the  “pill-in-the-pocket” approach. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:2384–2391. [PubMed: 15575054]  17. Alboni P, Botto GL, Boriani G, et al. Intravenous administration of flecainide or propafenone  in patients with recent-onset atrial fibrillation does not predict adverse effects during 'pill-in-thepockeť treatment. Heart. 2010;96:546–549. [PubMed: 20350992]  18. Andrade JG, MacGillivray J, Macle L, et al. Clinical effectiveness of a systematic “pill-in-thepocket” approach for the management of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. Heart Rhythm. 2018;15:9– 16. [PubMed: 29304952]  et al. Page 198 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

19. Kochiadakis GE, Igoumenidis NE, Solomou MC, et al. Conversion of atrial fibrillation to sinus  rhythm using acute intravenous procainamide infusion. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther. 1998;12:75–81.  [PubMed: 9607135]  20. Oral H, Souza JJ, Michaud GF, et al. Facilitating transthoracic cardioversion of atrial fibrillation  with ibutilide pretreatment. N Engl J Med. 1999;340:1849–1854. [PubMed: 10369847]  21. Kowey PR, VanderLugt JT, Luderer JR. Safety and risk/benefit analysis of ibutilide for acute  conversion of atrial fibrillation/flutter. Am J Cardiol. 1996;78:46–52. [PubMed: 8903276]  22. V olgman AS, Carberry PA, Stambler B, et al. Conversion efficacy and safety of intravenous  ibutilide compared with intravenous procainamide in patients with atrial flutter or fibrillation. J  Am Coll Cardiol. 1998;31:1414–1419. [PubMed: 9581743]  23. Stambler BS, Wood MA, Ellenbogen KA. Antiarrhythmic actions of intravenous ibutilide  compared with procainamide during human atrial flutter and fibrillation: electrophysiological  determinants of enhanced conversion efficacy. Circulation. 1997;96:4298–4306. [PubMed:  9416896]  24. Singh S, Zoble RG, Yellen L, et al. Efficacy and safety of oral dofetilide in converting  to and maintaining sinus rhythm in patients with chronic atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter:  the Symptomatic Atrial Fibrillation Investigative Research on Dofetilide (SAFIRE-D) study.  Circulation. 2000;102:2385–2390. [PubMed: 11067793]  25. Pedersen OD, Bagger H, Keller N, et al. Efficacy of dofetilide in the treatment of atrial fibrillationflutter in patients with reduced left ventricular function: a Danish investigations of arrhythmia and  mortality on dofetilide (diamond) substudy. Circulation. 2001;104:292–296. [PubMed: 11457747]  26. Deedwania PC, Singh BN, Ellenbogen K, et al. Spontaneous conversion and maintenance of  sinus rhythm by amiodarone in patients with heart failure and atrial fibrillation: observations from  the veterans affairs congestive heart failure survival trial of antiarrhythmic therapy (CHF-STAT).  The Department of Veterans Affairs CHF-STAT Investigators. Circulation. 1998;98:2574–2579.  [PubMed: 9843465]  27. Singh BN, Singh SN, Reda DJ, et al. Amiodarone versus sotalol for atrial fibrillation. N Engl J  Med. 2005;352:1861–1872. [PubMed: 15872201]  28. Vijayalakshmi K, Whittaker VJ, Sutton A, et al. A randomized trial of prophylactic antiarrhythmic  agents (amiodarone and sotalol) in patients with atrial fibrillation for whom direct current  cardioversion is planned. Am Heart J. 2006;151:863.e861–863.e866. 29. Sung RJ, Tan HL, Karagounis L, et al. Intravenous sotalol for the termination of supraventricular  tachycardia and atrial fibrillation and flutter: a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled study. Sotalol Multicenter Study Group. Am Heart J. 1995;129:739–748. [PubMed:  7900626]  30. V os MA, Golitsyn SR, Stangl K, et al. Superiority of ibutilide (a new class III agent) over  DL-sotalol in converting atrial flutter and atrial fibrillation. Heart. 1998;79:568–575. [PubMed:  10078083]  31. Van Gelder IC, Tuinenburg AE, Schoonderwoerd BS, et al. Pharmacologic versus direct-current  electrical cardioversion of atrial flutter and fibrillation. Am J Cardiol. 1999;84:147r–151r.  [PubMed: 10426330]  32. Caron MF, Kluger J, Tsikouris JP, et al. Effects of intravenous magnesium sulfate on the QT  interval in patients receiving ibutilide. Pharmacotherapy. 2003;23:296–300. [PubMed: 12627926]  33. Kalus JS, Spencer AP, Tsikouris JP, et al. Impact of prophylactic iv magnesium on the efficacy  of ibutilide for conversion of atrial fibrillation or flutter. Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2003;60:2308– 2312. [PubMed: 14652979]  34. Markman TM, Jarrah AA, Tian Y , et al. Safety of pill-in-the-pocket class 1C antiarrhythmic drugs  for atrial fibrillation. JACC: Clin Electrophysiol 2022;8:1515–1520. [PubMed: 36543501]  8.3.1. Specific Drug Therapy for Long-Term Maintenance of Sinus Rhythm 1. Pedersen OD, Bagger H, Keller N, et al. Efficacy of dofetilide in the treatment of atrial fibrillationflutter in patients with reduced left ventricular function: a Danish Investigations of Arrhythmia  and Mortality on Dofetilide (DIAMOND) substudy. Circulation. 2001;104:292–296. [PubMed:  11457747]  et al. Page 199 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

2. Deedwania PC, Singh BN, Ellenbogen K, et al. Spontaneous conversion and maintenance of sinus  rhythm by amiodarone in patients with heart failure and atrial fibrillation: observations from the  Veterans Affairs Congestive Heart Failure Survival Trial of Antiarrhythmic Therapy (CHF-STAT).  The Department of Veterans Affairs CHF-STAT Investigators. Circulation. 1998;98:2574–2579.  [PubMed: 9843465]  3. Anderson JL, Gilbert EM, Alpert BL, et al. Prevention of symptomatic recurrences of paroxysmal  atrial fibrillation in patients initially tolerating antiarrhythmic therapy. A multicenter, doubleblind, crossover study of flecainide and placebo with transtelephonic monitoring. Flecainide  Supraventricular Tachycardia Study Group. Circulation. 1989;80:1557–1570. [PubMed: 2513143]  4. Kirchhof P, Andresen D, Bosch R, et al. Short-term versus long-term antiarrhythmic drug treatment  after cardioversion of atrial fibrillation (Flec-SL): a prospective, randomised, open-label, blinded  endpoint assessment trial. Lancet. 2012;380:238–246. [PubMed: 22713626]  5. Valembois L, Audureau E, Takeda A, et al. Antiarrhythmics for maintaining sinus rhythm after  cardioversion of atrial fibrillation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2019;9:Cd005049. [PubMed:  31483500]  6. Reimold SC, Cantillon CO, Friedman PL, et al. Propafenone versus sotalol for suppression of  recurrent symptomatic atrial fibrillation. Am J Cardiol. 1993;71:558–563. [PubMed: 8438741]  7. Bellandi F, Simonetti I, Leoncini M, et al. Long-term efficacy and safety of propafenone and sotalol  for the maintenance of sinus rhythm after conversion of recurrent symptomatic atrial fibrillation.  Am J Cardiol. 2001;88:640–645. [PubMed: 11564387]  8. Pritchett EL, Page RL, Carlson M, et al. Efficacy and safety of sustainedrelease propafenone  (propafenone SR) for patients with atrial fibrillation. Am J Cardiol. 2003;92:941–946. [PubMed:  14556870]  9. Dogan A, Ergene O, Nazli C, et al. Efficacy of propafenone for maintaining sinus rhythm in patients  with recent onset or persistent atrial fibrillation after conversion: a randomized, placebo-controlled  study. Acta Cardiol. 2004;59:255–261. [PubMed: 15255456]  10. Kochiadakis GE, Igoumenidis NE, Hamilos ME, et al. Sotalol versus propafenone for long-term  maintenance of normal sinus rhythm in patients with recurrent symptomatic atrial fibrillation. Am  J Cardiol. 2004;94:1563–1566. [PubMed: 15589019]  11. Meinertz T, Lip GY , Lombardi F, et al. Efficacy and safety of propafenone sustained release  in the prophylaxis of symptomatic paroxysmal atrial fibrillation (The European Rythmol/ Rytmonorm Atrial Fibrillation Trial [ERAFT] Study). Am J Cardiol. 2002;90:1300–1306.  [PubMed: 12480038]  12. Brembilla-Perrot B, Houriez P, Beurrier D, et al. Predictors of atrial flutter with 1:1 conduction  in patients treated with class I antiarrhythmic drugs for atrial tachyarrhythmias. Int J Cardiol.  2001;80:7–15. [PubMed: 11532541]  13. Touboul P, Brugada J, Capucci A, et al. Dronedarone for prevention of atrial fibrillation: a  dose-ranging study. Eur Heart J. 2003;24:1481–1487. [PubMed: 12919771]  14. Singh BN, Connolly SJ, Crijns HJ, et al. Dronedarone for maintenance of sinus rhythm in atrial  fibrillation or flutter. N Engl J Med. 2007;357:987–999. [PubMed: 17804843]  15. Hohnloser SH, Crijns HJ, van Eickels M, et al. Effect of dronedarone on cardiovascular events in  atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2009;360:668–678. [PubMed: 19213680]  16. Singh S, Zoble RG, Yellen L, et al. Efficacy and safety of oral dofetilide in converting  to and maintaining sinus rhythm in patients with chronic atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter:  the Symptomatic Atrial Fibrillation Investigative Research on Dofetilide (SAFIRE-D) study.  Circulation. 2000;102:2385–2390. [PubMed: 11067793]  17. Singh BN, Singh SN, Reda DJ, et al. Amiodarone versus sotalol for atrial fibrillation. N Engl J  Med. 2005;352:1861–1872. [PubMed: 15872201]  18. Kochiadakis GE, Igoumenidis NE, Marketou ME, et al. Low dose amiodarone and sotalol in the  treatment of recurrent, symptomatic atrial fibrillation: a comparative, placebo controlled study.  Heart. 2000;84:251–257. [PubMed: 10956284]  19. Roy D, Talajic M, Dorian P, et al. Amiodarone to prevent recurrence of atrial fibrillation Canadian  Trial of Atrial Fibrillation Investigators. N Engl J Med. 2000;342:913–920. [PubMed: 10738049]  et al. Page 200 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

20. Galperin J, Elizari MV , Chiale PA, et al. Efficacy of amiodarone for the termination of  chronic atrial fibrillation and maintenance of normal sinus rhythm: a prospective, multicenter,  randomized, controlled, double blind trial. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol Ther. 2001;6:341–350.  [PubMed: 11907636]  21. Greene HL, Waldo AL, Corley SD, et al. Maintenance of sinus rhythm in patients with atrial  fibrillation: an AFFIRM substudy of the first antiarrhythmic drug. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;42:20– 29. [PubMed: 12849654]  22. Le Heuzey JY , De Ferrari GM, Radzik D, et al. A short-term, randomized, double-blind, parallelgroup study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of dronedarone versus amiodarone in patients with  persistent atrial fibrillation: the DIONYSOS study. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2010;21:597–605.  [PubMed: 20384650]  23. Epstein AE, Olshansky B, Naccarelli GV , et al. Practical management guide for clinicians who  treat patients with amiodarone. Am J Med. 2016;129:468–475. [PubMed: 26497904]  24. Hamilton DS, Nandkeolyar S, Lan H, et al. Amiodarone: a comprehensive guide for clinicians. Am  J Cardiovasc Drugs. 2020;20:549–558. [PubMed: 32166725]  25. Kuck KH, Cappato R, Siebels J, et al. Randomized comparison of antiarrhythmic drug therapy  with implantable defibrillators in patients resuscitated from cardiac arrest: the Cardiac Arrest  Study Hamburg (CASH). Circulation. 2000;102:748–754. [PubMed: 10942742]  26. Preliminary report: effect of encainide and flecainide on mortality in a randomized trial of  arrhythmia suppression after myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 1989;321:406–412. [PubMed:  2473403]  27. Echt DS, Liebson PR, Mitchell LB, et al. Mortality and morbidity in patients receiving encainide,  flecainide, or placebo. The Cardiac Arrhythmia Suppression Trial. N Engl J Med. 1991;324:781– 788. [PubMed: 1900101]  28. Kober L, Torp-Pedersen C, McMurray JJ, et al. Increased mortality after dronedarone therapy for  severe heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:2678–2687. [PubMed: 18565860]  29. Abraham JM, Saliba WI, Vekstein C, et al. Safety of oral dofetilide for rhythm control of atrial  fibrillation and atrial flutter. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2015;8:772–776. [PubMed: 26063741]  30. Cho JH, Youn SJ, Moore JC, et al. Safety of oral dofetilide reloading for treatment of atrial  arrhythmias. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2017;10:e005333. [PubMed: 29038104]  31. Mar PL, Horbal P, Chung MK, et al. Drug interactions affecting antiarrhythmic drug use. Circ  Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2022;15:e007955. [PubMed: 35491871]  32. Lakkireddy D, Ahmed A, Atkins D, et al. Feasibility and safety of intravenous sotalol loading  in adult patients with atrial fibrillation (DASH-AF). JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2023;9:555–564.  [PubMed: 37014289]  33. Cardiac Arrhythmia Suppression Trial III. Effect of the antiarrhythmic agent moricizine on survival  after myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 1992;327:227–233. [PubMed: 1377359]  34. Siebels J, Cappato R, Rüppel R, et al. Preliminary results of the Cardiac Arrest Study Hamburg  (CASH). CASH Investigators. Am J Cardiol. 1993;72:109f–113f. 8.3.2. Inpatient Initiation of Antiarrhythmic Agents 1. Singh S, Zoble RG, Yellen L, et al. Efficacy and safety of oral dofetilide in converting  to and maintaining sinus rhythm in patients with chronic atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter:  the Symptomatic Atrial Fibrillation Investigative Research on Dofetilide (SAFIRE-D) study.  Circulation. 2000;102:2385–2390. [PubMed: 11067793]  2. Abraham JM, Saliba WI, Vekstein C, et al. Safety of oral dofetilide for rhythm control of atrial  fibrillation and atrial flutter. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2015;8:772–776. [PubMed: 26063741]  3. Kaufman ES, Zimmermann PA, Wang T, et al. Risk of proarrhythmic events in the Atrial Fibrillation  Follow-up Investigation of Rhythm Management (AFFIRM) study: a multivariate analysis. J Am  Coll Cardiol. 2004;44:1276–1282. [PubMed: 15364332]  4. Yarlagadda B, Vuddanda V , Dar T, et al. Safety and efficacy of inpatient initiation of dofetilide  versus sotalol for atrial fibrillation. J Atr Fibrillation. 2017;10:1805. [PubMed: 29487686]  et al. Page 201 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

5. Torp-Pedersen C, Møller M, Bloch-Thomsen PE, et al. Dofetilide in patients with congestive heart  failure and left ventricular dysfunction. Danish Investigations of Arrhythmia and Mortality on  Dofetilide Study Group. N Engl J Med. 1999;341:857–865. [PubMed: 10486417]  6. Pedersen OD, Bagger H, Keller N, et al. Efficacy of dofetilide in the treatment of atrial fibrillationflutter in patients with reduced left ventricular function: a Danish investigations of arrhythmia and  mortality on dofetilide (diamond) substudy. Circulation. 2001;104:292–296. [PubMed: 11457747]  7. Kober L, Bloch Thomsen PE, Moller M, et al. Effect of dofetilide in patients with recent  myocardial infarction and left-ventricular dysfunction: a randomised trial. Lancet. 2000;356:2052– 2058. [PubMed: 11145491]  8. Chung MK, Schweikert RA, Wilkoff BL, et al. Is hospital admission for initiation of antiarrhythmic  therapy with sotalol for atrial arrhythmias required? Yield of in-hospital monitoring and prediction  of risk for significant arrhythmia complications. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1998;32:169–176. [PubMed:  9669266]  9. Alboni P, Botto GL, Baldi N, et al. Outpatient treatment of recent-onset atrial fibrillation with the  “pill-in-the-pocket” approach. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:2384–2391. [PubMed: 15575054]  10. Andrade JG, MacGillivray J, Macle L, et al. Clinical effectiveness of a systematic “pill-in-thepocket” approach for the management of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. Heart Rhythm. 2018;15:9– 16. [PubMed: 29304952]  11. Boriani G, Biffi M, Capucci A, et al. Conversion of recent-onset atrial fibrillation to sinus rhythm:  effects of different drug protocols. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 1998;21:2470–2474. [PubMed:  9825369]  12. Azpitarte J, Alvarez M, Baún O, et al. Value of single oral loading dose of propafenone in  converting recent-onset atrial fibrillation Results of a randomized, double-blind, controlled study.  Eur Heart J. 1997;18:1649–1654. [PubMed: 9347277]  13. Markman TM, Jarrah AA, Tian Y , et al. Safety of pill-in-the-pocket class 1C antiarrhythmic drugs  for atrial fibrillation. JACC: Clin Electrophysiol 2022;8:1515–1520. [PubMed: 36543501]  14. Tisdale JE, Chung MK, Campbell KB, et al. Drug-induced arrhythmias: a scientific statement from  the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2020;142:e214–e233. [PubMed: 32929996]  15. Singh BN, Singh SN, Reda DJ, et al. Amiodarone versus sotalol for atrial fibrillation. N Engl J  Med. 2005;352:1861–1872. [PubMed: 15872201]  16. Batul SA, Gopinathannair R. Intravenous sotalol - reintroducing a forgotten agent to the  electrophysiology therapeutic arsenal. J Atr Fibrillation. 2017;9:1499. [PubMed: 29250266]  8.3.3. Antiarrhythmic Drug Follow-Up 1. Ylli D, Wartofsky L, Burman KD. Evaluation and treatment of amiodarone-induced thyroid  disorders. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2021;106:226–236. [PubMed: 33159436]  2. Kinoshita S, Hosomi K, Yokoyama S, et al. Time-to-onset analysis of amiodarone-associated thyroid  dysfunction. J Clin Pharm Ther. 2020;45:65–71. [PubMed: 31400296]  3. Flaharty KK, Chase SL, Yaghsezian HM, et al. Hepatotoxicity associated with amiodarone therapy.  Pharmacotherapy. 1989;9:39–44. [PubMed: 2646621]  4. Hamilton D Sr, Nandkeolyar S, Lan H, et al. Amiodarone: a comprehensive guide for clinicians. Am  J Cardiovasc Drugs. 2020;20:549–558. [PubMed: 32166725]  5. Goldschlager N, Epstein AE, Naccarelli GV , et al. A practical guide for clinicians who treat patients  with amiodarone: 2007. Heart Rhythm. 2007;4:1250–1259. [PubMed: 17765636]  6. Gleadhill IC, Wise RA, Schonfeld SA, et al. Serial lung function testing in patients treated with  amiodarone: a prospective study. Am J Med. 1989;86:4–10. [PubMed: 2910095]  7. Bui A, Han S, Alexander M, et al. Pulmonary function testing for the early detection of druginduced lung disease: a systematic review in adults treated with drugs associated with pulmonary  toxicity. Intern Med J. 2020;50:1311–1325. [PubMed: 31588628]  8. Passman RS, Bennett CL, Purpura JM, et al. Amiodarone-associated optic neuropathy: a critical  review. Am J Med. 2012;125:447–453. [PubMed: 22385784]  9. Tisdale JE, Chung MK, Campbell KB, et al. Drug-induced arrhythmias: a scientific statement from  the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2020;142:e214–e233. [PubMed: 32929996]  et al. Page 202 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

10. Hohnloser SH, Klingenheben T, Singh BN. Amiodarone-associated pro-arrhythmic effects. A  review with special reference to torsade de pointes tachycardia. Ann Intern Med. 1994;121:529– 535. [PubMed: 8067651]  11. Singh S, Zoble RG, Yellen L, et al. Efficacy and safety of oral dofetilide in converting  to and maintaining sinus rhythm in patients with chronic atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter:  the Symptomatic Atrial Fibrillation Investigative Research on Dofetilide (SAFIRE-D) study.  Circulation. 2000;102:2385–2390. [PubMed: 11067793]  12. Torp-Pedersen C, Møller M, Bloch-Thomsen PE, et al. Dofetilide in patients with congestive heart  failure and left ventricular dysfunction. Danish Investigations of Arrhythmia and Mortality on  Dofetilide Study Group. N Engl J Med. 1999;341:857–865. [PubMed: 10486417]  13. Rizkallah J, Kuriachan V , Brent Mitchell L. The use of dronedarone for recurrent ventricular  tachycardia: a case report and review of the literature. BMC Res Notes. 2016;9:370. [PubMed:  27461025]  14. Jahn S, Zollner G, Lackner C, et al. Severe toxic hepatitis associated with dronedarone. Curr Drug  Saf. 2013;8:201–202. [PubMed: 23789833]  15. VanderLugt JT, Mattioni T, Denker S, et al. Efficacy and safety of ibutilide fumarate for the  conversion of atrial arrhythmias after cardiac surgery. Circulation. 1999;100:369–375. [PubMed:  10421596]  16. Ellenbogen KA, Stambler BS, Wood MA, et al. Efficacy of intravenous ibutilide for rapid  termination of atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter: a dose-response study. J Am Coll Cardiol.  1996;28:130–136. [PubMed: 8752805]  17. Stambler BS, Beckman KJ, Kadish AH, et al. Acute hemodynamic effects of intravenous ibutilide  in patients with or without reduced left ventricular function. Am J Cardiol. 1997;80:458–463.  [PubMed: 9285658]  18. Wood MA, Stambler BS, Ellenbogen KA, et al. Suppression of inducible ventricular tachycardia  by ibutilide in patients with coronary artery disease Ibutilide Investigators. Am Heart J.  1998;135:1048–1054. [PubMed: 9630110]  19. Abi-Mansour P, Carberry PA, McCowan RJ, et al. Conversion efficacy and safety of repeated doses  of ibutilide in patients with atrial flutter and atrial fibrillation. Am Heart J. 1998;136:632–642.  [PubMed: 9778066]  20. Gowda RM, Punukollu G, Khan IA, et al. Ibutilide for pharmacological cardioversion of atrial  fibrillation and flutter: impact of race on efficacy and safety. Am J Ther. 2003;10:259–263.  [PubMed: 12845389]  21. Stambler BS, Wood MA, Ellenbogen KA, et al. Efficacy and safety of repeated intravenous  doses of ibutilide for rapid conversion of atrial flutter or fibrillation Ibutilide Repeat Dose Study  Investigators. Circulation. 1996;94:1613–1621. [PubMed: 8840852]  22. Kay GN, Plumb VJ, Arciniegas JG, et al. Torsade de pointes: the long-short initiating sequence and  other clinical features: observations in 32 patients. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1983;2:806–817. [PubMed:  6630761]  23. Vardas PE, Kochiadakis GE, Igoumenidis NE, et al. Amiodarone as a first-choice drug for  restoring sinus rhythm in patients with atrial fibrillation: a randomized, controlled study. Chest.  2000;117:1538–1545. [PubMed: 10858380]  24. McKibbin JK, Pocock W A, Barlow JB, et al. Sotalol, hypokalaemia, syncope, and torsade de  pointes. Br Heart J. 1984;51:157–162. [PubMed: 6197982]  25. Roden DM, Woosley RL, Primm RK. Incidence and clinical features of the quinidine-associated  long QT syndrome: implications for patient care. Am Heart J. 1986;111:1088–1093. [PubMed:  3716982]  26. Zeltser D, Justo D, Halkin A, et al. Torsade de pointes due to noncardiac drugs: most patients have  easily identifiable risk factors. Medicine (Baltim). 2003;82:282–290. 27. Marsepoil T, Blin F, Hardy F, et al. [Torsades de pointes and hypomagnesemia]. Ann Fr Anesth  Reanim. 1985;4:524–526. [PubMed: 2418718]  28. Gysel M, Vieweg WV , Hasnain M, et al. Torsades de pointes following clarithromycin treatment.  Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther. 2013;11:1485–1493. [PubMed: 24147515]  et al. Page 203 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

29. Overbey AN, Austin A, Seidensticker DF, et al. Overdrive pacing in a patient with incessant  torsades de pointes. BMJ Case Rep. 2013;2013:bcr2013200146. 30. Kochiadakis GE, Igoumenidis NE, Solomou MC, et al. Conversion of atrial fibrillation to sinus  rhythm using acute intravenous procainamide infusion. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther. 1998;12:75–81.  [PubMed: 9607135]  31. Stambler BS, Wood MA, Ellenbogen KA. Antiarrhythmic actions of intravenous ibutilide  compared with procainamide during human atrial flutter and fibrillation: electrophysiological  determinants of enhanced conversion efficacy. Circulation. 1997;96:4298–4306. [PubMed:  9416896]  32. Bhandari AK, Au PK, Rahimtoola SH. Procainamide induced sustained monomorphic ventricular  tachycardia in a patient with benign premature ventricular complexes. Can J Cardiol. 1986;2:6–9.  [PubMed: 2420424]  33. Singh BN, Kehoe R, Woosley RL, et al. Multicenter trial of sotalol compared with procainamide  in the suppression of inducible ventricular tachycardia: a double-blind, randomized parallel  evaluation. Sotalol Multicenter Study Group. Am Heart J. 1995;129:87–97. [PubMed: 7817931]  34. Singh BN, Singh SN, Reda DJ, et al. Amiodarone versus sotalol for atrial fibrillation. N Engl J  Med. 2005;352:1861–1872. [PubMed: 15872201]  35. Fetsch T, Bauer P, Engberding R, et al. Prevention of atrial fibrillation after cardioversion: results  of the PAFAC trial. Eur Heart J. 2004;25:1385–1394. [PubMed: 15302102]  8.3.4. Upstream Therapy 1. Dernellis J, Panaretou M. Relationship between C-reactive protein concentrations during  glucocorticoid therapy and recurrent atrial fibrillation. Eur Heart J. 2004;25:1100–1107. [PubMed:  15231367]  2. Schneider MP, Hua TA, Böhm M, et al. Prevention of atrial fibrillation by renin-angiotensin system  inhibition a meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;55:2299–2307. [PubMed: 20488299]  3. Healey JS, Baranchuk A, Crystal E, et al. Prevention of atrial fibrillation with angiotensinconverting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers: a meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol.  2005;45:1832–1839. [PubMed: 15936615]  4. Ducharme A, Swedberg K, Pfeffer MA, et al. Prevention of atrial fibrillation in patients with  symptomatic chronic heart failure by candesartan in the Candesartan in Heart failure: assessment of  Reduction in Mortality and morbidity (CHARM) program. Am Heart J. 2006;151:985–991. 5. McMurray JJ, Young JB, Dunlap ME, et al. Relationship of dose of background angiotensinconverting enzyme inhibitor to the benefits of candesartan in the Candesartan in Heart failure:  Assessment of Reduction in Mortality and morbidity (CHARM)-Added trial. Am Heart J.  2006;151:985–991. 6. Wachtell K, Lehto M, Gerdts E, et al. Angiotensin II receptor blockade reduces new-onset  atrial fibrillation and subsequent stroke compared to atenolol: the Losartan Intervention For End  Point Reduction in Hypertension (LIFE) study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;45:712–719. [PubMed:  15734615]  7. Anand K, Mooss AN, Hee TT, et al. Meta-analysis: inhibition of renin-angiotensin system prevents  new-onset atrial fibrillation. Am Heart J. 2006;152:217–222. [PubMed: 16875900]  8. Okin PM, Wachtell K, Devereux RB, et al. Regression of electrocardiographic left ventricular  hypertrophy and decreased incidence of new-onset atrial fibrillation in patients with hypertension.  JAMA. 2006;296:1242–1248. [PubMed: 16968848]  9. Olsson LG, Swedberg K, Ducharme A, et al. Atrial fibrillation and risk of clinical events in chronic  heart failure with and without left ventricular systolic dysfunction results from the candesartan in  heart failure-assessment of reduction in mortality and morbidity (CHARM) program. J Am Coll  Cardiol. 2006;47:1997–2004. [PubMed: 16697316]  10. Liakopoulos OJ, Choi YH, Kuhn EW, et al. Statins for prevention of atrial fibrillation after  cardiac surgery: a systematic literature review. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2009;138:678–686 e671.  [PubMed: 19698856]  et al. Page 204 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

11. Kuhn EW, Liakopoulos OJ, Stange S, et al. Preoperative statin therapy in cardiac surgery: a metaanalysis of 90 000 patients. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2014;45:17–26. discussion 26. [PubMed:  23562936]  12. Patti G, Chello M, Candura D, et al. Randomized trial of atorvastatin for reduction of  postoperative atrial fibrillation in patients undergoing cardiac surgery: results of the ARMYDA-3  (Atorvastatin for Reduction of MYocardial Dysrhythmia After cardiac surgery) study. Circulation.  2006;114:1455–1461. [PubMed: 17000910]  13. Kourliouros A, De Souza A, Roberts N, et al. Dose-related effect of statins on atrial fibrillation  after cardiac surgery. Ann Thorac Surg. 2008;85:1515–1520. [PubMed: 18442529]  14. Saso S, Vecht JA, Rao C, et al. Statin therapy may influence the incidence of postoperative atrial  fibrillation: what is the evidence? Tex Heart Inst J. 2009;36:521–529. [PubMed: 20069076]  15. Zheng Z, Jayaram R, Jiang L, et al. Perioperative rosuvastatin in cardiac surgery. N Engl J Med.  2016;374:1744–1753. [PubMed: 27144849]  16. Rahimi K, Emberson J, McGale P, et al. Effect of statins on atrial fibrillation: collaborative  meta-analysis of published and unpublished evidence from randomised controlled trials. BMJ.  2011;342:d1250. [PubMed: 21411487]  17. Hemilä H, Suonsyrjä T. Vitamin C for preventing atrial fibrillation in high risk patients: a  systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2017;17:49. [PubMed: 28143406]  18. Delise P, Bertocchi F, Maiocchi G, et al. Valsartan for prevention of recurrent atrial fibrillation. N  Engl J Med. 2009;360:1606–1617. [PubMed: 19369667]  19. Yusuf S, Healey JS, Pogue J, et al. Irbesartan in patients with atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med.  2011;364:928–938. [PubMed: 21388310]  20. Goette A, Schön N, Kirchhof P, et al. Angiotensin II-antagonist in paroxysmal atrial fibrillation  (ANTIPAF) trial. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2012;5:43–51. [PubMed: 22157519]  21. Swedberg K, Zannad F, McMurray JJ, et al. Eplerenone and atrial fibrillation in mild systolic  heart failure: results from the EMPHASIS-HF (Eplerenone in Mild Patients Hospitalization  And SurvIval Study in Heart Failure) study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59:1598–1603. [PubMed:  22538330]  22. Neefs J, van den Berg NW, Limpens J, et al. Aldosterone pathway blockade to prevent atrial  fibrillation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Cardiol. 2017;231:155–161. [PubMed:  28062142]  23. Zheng RJ, Wang Y , Tang JN, et al. Association of SGLT2 inhibitors with risk of atrial fibrillation  and stroke in patients with and without type 2 diabetes: a systemic review and meta-analysis of  randomized controlled trials. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 2022;79:e145–e152. [PubMed: 34813574]  24. Okunrintemi V , Mishriky BM, Powell JR, et al. Sodium-glucose co-transporter-2 inhibitors  and atrial fibrillation in the cardiovascular and renal outcome trials. Diabetes Obes Metab.  2021;23:276–280. [PubMed: 33001548]  25. Li WJ, Chen XQ, Xu LL, et al. SGLT2 inhibitors and atrial fibrillation in type 2 diabetes: a  systematic review with meta-analysis of 16 randomized controlled trials. Cardiovasc Diabetol.  2020;19:130. [PubMed: 32847602]  26. Bianconi L, Cal L, Mennuni M, et al. N-3 Polyunsaturated fatty acids for the prevention of  arrhythmia recurrence after electrical cardioversion of chronic persistent atrial fibrillation: a  randomized, double-blind, multicentre study. Europace. 2011;13:174–181. [PubMed: 21059740]  27. Kowey PR, Reiffel JA, Ellenbogen KA, et al. Efficacy and safety of prescription omega-3 fatty  acids for the prevention of recurrent symptomatic atrial fibrillation: a randomized controlled trial.  JAMA. 2010;304:2363–2372. [PubMed: 21078810]  28. Mozaffarian D, Marchioli R, Macchia A, et al. Fish oil and postoperative atrial fibrillation: the  Omega-3 Fatty Acids for Prevention of Post-operative Atrial Fibrillation (OPERA) randomized  trial. JAMA. 2012;308:2001–2011. [PubMed: 23128104]  29. Macchia A, Grancelli H, Varini S, et al. Omega-3 fatty acids for the prevention of recurrent  symptomatic atrial fibrillation: results of the FORW ARD (Randomized Trial to Assess Efficacy  of PUFA for the Maintenance of Sinus Rhythm in Persistent Atrial Fibrillation) trial. J Am Coll  Cardiol. 2013;61:463–468. [PubMed: 23265344]  et al. Page 205 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

30. Gencer B, Djousse L, Al-Ramady OT, et al. Effect of long-term marine −3 fatty acids  supplementation on the risk of atrial fibrillation in randomized controlled trials of cardiovascular  outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Circulation. 2021;144:1981–1990. [PubMed:  34612056]  31. Savelieva I, Kourliouros A, Camm J. Primary and secondary prevention of atrial fibrillation  with statins and polyunsaturated fatty acids: Review of evidence and clinical relevance. Naunyn  Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 2010;381:207–219. 8.4. AF Catheter Ablation 1. Krittayaphong R, Raungrattanaamporn O, Bhuripanyo K, et al. A randomized clinical trial of the  efficacy of radiofrequency catheter ablation and amiodarone in the treatment of symptomatic atrial  fibrillation. J Med Assoc Thai. 2003;86(suppl 1):S8–S16. [PubMed: 12866763]  2. Stabile G, Bertaglia E, Senatore G, et al. Catheter ablation treatment in patients with drug-refractory  atrial fibrillation: a prospective, multi-centre, randomized, controlled study (Catheter Ablation for  the Cure of Atrial Fibrillation Study). Eur Heart J. 2006;27:216–221. [PubMed: 16214831]  3. Pappone C, Augello G, Sala S, et al. A randomized trial of circumferential pulmonary vein ablation  versus antiarrhythmic drug therapy in paroxysmal atrial fibrillation: the APAF Study. J Am Coll  Cardiol. 2006;48:2340–2347. [PubMed: 17161267]  4. Packer DL, Mark DB, Robb RA, et al. Effect of catheter ablation vs antiarrhythmic drug therapy on  mortality, stroke, bleeding, and cardiac arrest among patients with atrial fibrillation: the CABANA  randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2019;321:1261–1274. [PubMed: 30874766]  5. Oral H, Pappone C, Chugh A, et al. Circumferential pulmonary-vein ablation for chronic atrial  fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:934–941. [PubMed: 16510747]  6. Jaïs P, Cauchemez B, Macle L, et al. Catheter ablation versus antiarrhythmic drugs for atrial  fibrillation: the A4 study. Circulation. 2008;118:2498–2505. [PubMed: 19029470]  7. Forleo GB, Mantica M, De Luca L, et al. Catheter ablation of atrial fibrillation in patients with  diabetes mellitus type 2: results from a randomized study comparing pulmonary vein isolation  versus antiarrhythmic drug therapy. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2009;20:22–28. [PubMed:  18775050]  8. Wilber DJ, Pappone C, Neuzil P, et al. Comparison of antiarrhythmic drug therapy and  radiofrequency catheter ablation in patients with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation: a randomized  controlled trial. JAMA. 2010;303:333–340. [PubMed: 20103757]  9. MacDonald MR, Connelly DT, Hawkins NM, et al. Radiofrequency ablation for persistent atrial  fibrillation in patients with advanced heart failure and severe left ventricular systolic dysfunction: a  randomised controlled trial. Heart. 2011;97:740–747. [PubMed: 21051458]  10. Packer DL, Kowal RC, Wheelan KR, et al. Cryoballoon ablation of pulmonary veins for  paroxysmal atrial fibrillation: first results of the North American Arctic Front (STOP AF) pivotal  trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61:1713–1723. [PubMed: 23500312]  11. Cosedis Nielsen J, Johannessen A, Raatikainen P, et al. Radiofrequency ablation as initial therapy  in paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:1587–1595. [PubMed: 23094720]  12. Andrade JG, Wells GA, Deyell MW, et al. Cryoablation or drug therapy for initial treatment of  atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2021;384:305–315. [PubMed: 33197159]  13. Wazni OM, Dandamudi G, Sood N, et al. Cryoballoon ablation as initial therapy for atrial  fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2021;384:316–324. [PubMed: 33197158]  14. Andrade JG, Deyell MW, Macle L, et al. Progression of atrial fibrillation after cryoablation or drug  therapy. N Engl J Med. 2023;388:105–116. [PubMed: 36342178]  15. Morillo CA, Verma A, Connolly SJ, et al. Radiofrequency ablation vs antiarrhythmic drugs  as first-line treatment of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation (RAAFT-2): a randomized trial. JAMA.  2014;311:692–700. [PubMed: 24549549]  16. Wazni OM, Marrouche NF, Martin DO, et al. Radiofrequency ablation vs antiarrhythmic drugs as  first-line treatment of symptomatic atrial fibrillation: a randomized trial. JAMA. 2005;293:2634– 2640. [PubMed: 15928285]  et al. Page 206 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

17. Wazni O, Marrouche NF, Martin DO, et al. Randomized study comparing combined pulmonary  vein-left atrial junction disconnection and cavotricuspid isthmus ablation versus pulmonary veinleft atrial junction disconnection alone in patients presenting with typical atrial flutter and atrial  fibrillation. Circulation. 2003;108:2479–2483. [PubMed: 14610012]  18. Pérez FJ, Schubert CM, Parvez B, et al. Long-term outcomes after catheter ablation of  cavo-tricuspid isthmus dependent atrial flutter: a meta-analysis. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol.  2009;2:393–401. [PubMed: 19808495]  19. Patel NJ, Deshmukh A, Pau D, et al. Contemporary utilization and safety outcomes of catheter  ablation of atrial flutter in the United States: analysis of 89 638 procedures. Heart Rhythm.  2016;13:1317–1325. [PubMed: 26861515]  20. Waldo AL, Feld GK. Inter-relationships of atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter mechanisms and  clinical implications. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008;51:779–786. [PubMed: 18294560]  21. Lee SH, Tai CT, Hsieh MH, et al. Predictors of non-pulmonary vein ectopic beats initiating  paroxysmal atrial fibrillation: implication for catheter ablation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;46:1054– 1059. [PubMed: 16168291]  22. Di Biase L, Burkhardt JD, Mohanty P, et al. Left atrial appendage: an underrecognized trigger site  of atrial fibrillation. Circulation. 2010;122:109–118. [PubMed: 20606120]  23. Katritsis DG, Giazitzoglou E, Wood MA, et al. Inducible supraventricular tachycardias in  patients referred for catheter ablation of atrial fibrillation. Europace. 2007;9:785–789. [PubMed:  17545655]  24. Miyamoto KJ, Tsuchihashi K, Uno K, et al. Studies on the prevalence of complicated atrial  arrhythmias, flutter, and fibrillation in patients with reciprocating supraventricular tachycardia  before and after successful catheter ablation. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2001;24:969–978.  [PubMed: 11449594]  25. Calkins H, Hindricks G, Cappato R, et al. 2017 HRS/EHRA/ECAS/APHRS/SOLAECE expert  consensus statement on catheter and surgical ablation of atrial fibrillation. Heart Rhythm.  2017;14:e275–e444. [PubMed: 28506916]  26. Yalin K, Ikitimur B, Aksu T, et al. Catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation in patients </=30 years of  age. Am J Cardiol. 2022;166:53–57. [PubMed: 34973688]  27. El Assaad I, Hammond BH, Kost LD, et al. Management and outcomes of atrial fibrillation in 241  healthy children and young adults: revisiting “lone” atrial fibrillation-a multi-institutional PACES  collaborative study. Heart Rhythm. 2021;18:1815–1822. [PubMed: 34343691]  28. Mont L, Bisbal F, Hernandez-Madrid A, et al. Catheter ablation vs antiarrhythmic drug treatment  of persistent atrial fibrillation: a multicentre, randomized, controlled trial (SARA study). Eur Heart  J. 2014;35:501–507. [PubMed: 24135832]  29. Chew DS, Li Y , Cowper PA, et al. Cost-effectiveness of catheter ablation versus antiarrhythmic  drug therapy in atrial fibrillation: the CABANA randomized clinical trial. Circulation.  2022;146:535–547. [PubMed: 35726631]  30. Aronsson M, Walfridsson H, Janzon M, et al. The cost-effectiveness of radiofrequency catheter  ablation as first-line treatment for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation: results from a MANTRA-PAF  substudy. Europace. 2015;17:48–55. [PubMed: 25341739]  31. Disertori M, Lombardi F, Barlera S, et al. Clinical characteristics of patients with asymptomatic  recurrences of atrial fibrillation in the Gruppo Italiano per lo Studio della Sopravvivenza  nell'Infarto Miocardico-Atrial Fibrillation (GISSI-AF) trial. Am Heart J. 2011;162:382–389.  [PubMed: 21835301]  32. Senoo K, Suzuki S, Otsuka T, et al. Progression to the persistent form in asymptomatic paroxysmal  atrial fibrillation. Circ J. 2014;78:1121–1126. [PubMed: 24553324]  33. Padfield GJ, Steinberg C, Swampillai J, et al. Progression of paroxysmal to persistent atrial  fibrillation: 10-year follow-up in the Canadian Registry of Atrial Fibrillation. Heart Rhythm.  2017;14:801–807. [PubMed: 28232263]  34. Ogawa H, An Y , Ikeda S, et al. Progression From paroxysmal to sustained atrial fibrillation is  associated with increased adverse events. Stroke. 2018;49:2301–2308. [PubMed: 30355097]  et al. Page 207 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

35. Yang WY , Du X, Fawzy AM, et al. Associations of atrial fibrillation progression with clinical  risk factors and clinical prognosis: a report from the Chinese Atrial Fibrillation Registry study. J  Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2021;32:333–341. [PubMed: 33269504]  36. R BS, Pecen L, Engler D, et al. Atrial fibrillation patterns are associated with arrhythmia  progression and clinical outcomes. Heart. 2018;104:1608–1614. [PubMed: 29550771]  37. Liao YC, Liao JN, Lo LW, et al. Left atrial size and left ventricular end-systolic dimension  predict the progression of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation after catheter ablation. J Cardiovasc  Electrophysiol. 2017;28:23–30. [PubMed: 27779351]  38. Walters TE, Nisbet A, Morris GM, et al. Progression of atrial remodeling in patients with highburden atrial fibrillation: implications for early ablative intervention. Heart Rhythm. 2016;13:331– 339. [PubMed: 26484789]  39. Holmqvist F, Kim S, Steinberg BA, et al. Heart rate is associated with progression of atrial  fibrillation, independent of rhythm. Heart. 2015;101:894–899. [PubMed: 25732748]  40. January CT, Wann LS, Alpert JS, et al. 2014 AHA/ACC/HRS guideline for the management  of patients with atrial fibrillation: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American  Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. Circulation.  2019;140:e125–e151. [PubMed: 30686041]  41. Kuck K-H, Lebedev DS, Mikhaylov EN, et al. Catheter ablation or medical therapy to delay  progression of atrial fibrillation: the randomized controlled atrial fibrillation progression trial  (ATTEST). EP: Europace. 2021;23:362–369. 42. Monahan KH, Bunch TJ, Mark DB, et al. Influence of atrial fibrillation type on outcomes  of ablation vs drug therapy: results from CABANA. Europace. 2022;24:1430–1440. [PubMed:  35640922]  43. Nyong J, Amit G, Adler AJ, et al. Efficacy and safety of ablation for people with non-paroxysmal  atrial fibrillation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016;11:Cd012088. [PubMed: 27871122]  44. Friedman DJ, Field ME, Rahman M, et al. Catheter ablation and healthcare utilization and cost  among patients with paroxysmal versus persistent atrial fibrillation. Heart Rhythm O2. 2021;2:28– 36. [PubMed: 34113902]  45. Bahnson TD, Giczewska A, Mark DB, et al. Association between age and outcomes of catheter  ablation versus medical therapy for atrial fibrillation: results from the CABANA trial. Circulation.  2022;145:796–804. [PubMed: 34933570]  46. Mark DB, Anstrom KJ, Sheng S, et al. Effect of catheter ablation vs medical therapy on quality  of life among patients with atrial fibrillation: the CABANA randomized clinical trial. JAMA.  2019;321:1275–1285. [PubMed: 30874716]  47. Miura K, Ikemura N, Kimura T, et al. Treatment strategies and subsequent changes in the patientreported quality-of-life among elderly patients with atrial fibrillation. Am Heart J. 2020;222:83– 92. [PubMed: 32028139]  48. Delise P, Gianfranchi L, Paparella N, et al. Clinical usefulness of slow pathway ablation in patients  with both paroxysmal atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia and atrial fibrillation. Am J  Cardiol. 1997;79:1421–1423. [PubMed: 9165175]  49. Weiss R, Knight BP, Bahu M, et al. Long-term follow-up after radiofrequency ablation of  paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia in patients with tachycardia-induced atrial fibrillation.  Am J Cardiol. 1997;80:1609–1610. [PubMed: 9416948]  50. Waranugraha Y , Rizal A, Rohman MS, et al. Prophylactic cavotricuspid isthmus ablation in  atrial fibrillation without documented typical atrial flutter: a systematic review and meta-analysis.  Arrhythm Electrophysiol Rev. 2022;11:e10. [PubMed: 35846424]  51. Gupta D, Ding WY , Calvert P, et al. Cryoballoon pulmonary vein isolation as first-line treatment  for typical atrial flutter. Heart. 2023;109:364–371. [PubMed: 36396438]  52. Anderson JL, Heidenreich PA, Barnett PG, et al. ACC/AHA statement on cost/value methodology  in clinical practice guidelines and performance measures: a report of the American College of  Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Performance Measures and Task Force on  Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;129:2329–2345. [PubMed: 24677315]  53. Gao L, Moodie M. Modelling the lifetime cost-effectiveness of catheter ablation for atrial  fibrillation with heart failure. BMJ Open. 2019;9:e031033. et al. Page 208 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

54. Chew DS, Loring Z, Anand J, et al. Economic evaluation of catheter ablation of atrial fibrillation  in patients with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes.  2020;13:E007094. [PubMed: 33280436]  55. Lau D, Sandhu RK, Andrade JG, et al. Cost-utility of catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation  in patients with heart failure: an economic evaluation. J Am Heart Assoc. 2021;10:e019599.  [PubMed: 34238020]  56. Wong JA, Conen D, Van Gelder IC, et al. Progression of device-detected subclinical atrial  fibrillation and the risk of heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018;71:2603–2611. [PubMed:  29880119]  57. Navarrete A, Conte F, Moran M, et al. Ablation of atrial fibrillation at the time of cavotricuspid  isthmus ablation in patients with atrial flutter without documented atrial fibrillation derives a better  long-term benefit. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2011;22:34–38. [PubMed: 20662976]  58. Kim JY , Park HS, Park HW, et al. Clinical outcomes of rhythm control strategies for asymptomatic  atrial fibrillation according to the quality-of-life score: the CODE-AF (Comparison Study of Drugs  for Symptom Control and Complication Prevention of Atrial Fibrillation) registry. J Am Heart  Assoc. 2022;11:e025956. [PubMed: 36073646]  59. Willems S, Borof K, Brandes A, et al. Systematic, early rhythm control strategy for atrial  fibrillation in patients with or without symptoms: the EAST-AFNET 4 trial. Eur Heart J.  2022;43:1219–1230. [PubMed: 34447995]  8.4.1. Patient Selection 1. Packer DL, Mark DB, Robb RA, et al. Effect of catheter ablation vs antiarrhythmic drug therapy on  mortality, stroke, bleeding, and cardiac arrest among patients with atrial fibrillation: the CABANA  randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2019;321:1261–1274. [PubMed: 30874766]  2. Andrade JG, Turgeon RD, Macle L, et al. Cryoablation or drug therapy for initial treatment of atrial  fibrillation. Eur Cardiol. 2022;17:e10. [PubMed: 35432602]  3. Calkins H, Reynolds MR, Spector P, et al. Treatment of atrial fibrillation with antiarrhythmic drugs  or radiofrequency ablation: two systematic literature reviews and meta-analyses. Circ Arrhythm  Electrophysiol. 2009;2:349–361. [PubMed: 19808490]  4. Blomstrom-Lundqvist C, Gizurarson S, Schwieler J, et al. Effect of catheter ablation vs  antiarrhythmic medication on quality of life in patients with atrial fibrillation: the CAPTAF  randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2019;321:1059–1068. [PubMed: 30874754]  5. Kirchhof P, Camm AJ, Goette A, et al. Early rhythm-control therapy in patients with atrial  fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2020;383:1305–1316. [PubMed: 32865375]  6. Njoku A, Kannabhiran M, Arora R, et al. Left atrial volume predicts atrial fibrillation recurrence  after radiofrequency ablation: a meta-analysis. Europace. 2018;20:33–42. [PubMed: 28444307]  7. McLellan AJ, Ling LH, Azzopardi S, et al. Diffuse ventricular fibrosis measured by T(1)  mapping on cardiac MRI predicts success of catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation. Circ Arrhythm  Electrophysiol. 2014;7:834–840. [PubMed: 25141860]  8. Marrouche NF, Wilber D, Hindricks G, et al. Association of atrial tissue fibrosis identified by  delayed enhancement MRI and atrial fibrillation catheter ablation: the DECAAF study. JAMA.  2014;311:498–506. [PubMed: 24496537]  9. Chew DS, Jones KA, Loring Z, et al. Diagnosis-to-ablation time predicts recurrent atrial fibrillation  and rehospitalization following catheter ablation. Heart Rhythm O2. 2022;3:23–31. [PubMed:  35243432]  10. Chew DS, Black-Maier E, Loring Z, et al. Diagnosis-to-ablation time and recurrence of atrial  fibrillation following catheter ablation: a systematic review and meta-analysis of observational  studies. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2020;13:e008128. [PubMed: 32191539]  11. Black-Maier E, Parish A, Steinberg BA, et al. Predicting atrial fibrillation recurrence after ablation  in patients with heart failure: validity of the APPLE and CAAP-AF risk scoring systems. Pacing  Clin Electrophysiol. 2019;42:1440–1447. [PubMed: 31544956]  et al. Page 209 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

12. Di Biase L, Mohanty P, Mohanty S, et al. Ablation versus amiodarone for treatment of persistent  atrial fibrillation in patients with congestive heart failure and an implanted device: results from the  AATAC multicenter randomized trial. Circulation. 2016;133:1637–1644. [PubMed: 27029350]  13. Marrouche NF, Brachmann J, Andresen D, et al. Catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation with heart  failure. N Engl J Med. 2018;378:417–427. [PubMed: 29385358]  14. Turagam MK, Garg J, Whang W, et al. Catheter ablation of atrial fibrillation in patients with  heart failure: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Ann Intern Med. 2019;170:41–50.  [PubMed: 30583296]  8.4.2. Techniques and Technologies for AF Catheter Ablation 1. Atienza F, Almendral J, Ormaetxe JM, et al. Comparison of radiofrequency catheter ablation  of drivers and circumferential pulmonary vein isolation in atrial fibrillation: a noninferiority  randomized multicenter RADAR-AF trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:2455–2467. [PubMed:  25500229]  2. Chen M, Yang B, Chen H, et al. Randomized comparison between pulmonary vein antral isolation  versus complex fractionated electrogram ablation for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. J Cardiovasc  Electrophysiol. 2011;22:973–981. [PubMed: 21539635]  3. Di Biase L, Elayi CS, Fahmy TS, et al. Atrial fibrillation ablation strategies for paroxysmal patients:  randomized comparison between different techniques. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2009;2:113– 119. [PubMed: 19808455]  4. Katritsis DG, Pokushalov E, Romanov A, et al. Autonomic denervation added to pulmonary  vein isolation for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation: a randomized clinical trial. J Am Coll Cardiol.  2013;62:2318–2325. [PubMed: 23973694]  5. Mamchur SE, Mamchur IN, Khomenko EA, et al. 'Electrical exclusion' of a critical myocardial mass  by extended pulmonary vein antrum isolation for persistent atrial fibrillation treatment. Interv Med  Appl Sci. 2014;6:31–39. [PubMed: 24672673]  6. Verma A, Mantovan R, Macle L, et al. Substrate and Trigger Ablation for Reduction of Atrial  Fibrillation (STAR AF): a randomized, multicentre, international trial. Eur Heart J. 2010;31:1344– 1356. [PubMed: 20215126]  7. Sau A, Howard JP, Al-Aidarous S, et al. Meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials of atrial  fibrillation ablation with pulmonary vein isolation versus without. JACC Clin Electrophysiol.  2019;5:968–976. [PubMed: 31439299]  8. Marrouche NF, Wazni O, McGann C, et al. Effect of MRI-guided fibrosis ablation vs conventional  catheter ablation on atrial arrhythmia recurrence in patients with persistent atrial fibrillation: the  DECAAF II randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2022;327:2296–2305. [PubMed: 35727277]  9. Gianni C, Mohanty S, Di Biase L, et al. Acute and early outcomes of focal impulse and rotor  modulation (FIRM)-guided rotors-only ablation in patients with nonparoxysmal atrial fibrillation.  Heart Rhythm. 2016;13:830–835. [PubMed: 26706193]  10. Narayan SM, Baykaner T, Clopton P, et al. Ablation of rotor and focal sources reduces late  recurrence of atrial fibrillation compared with trigger ablation alone: extended follow-up of the  CONFIRM trial (Conventional Ablation for Atrial Fibrillation With or Without Focal Impulse and  Rotor Modulation). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63:1761–1768. [PubMed: 24632280]  11. Tilz RR, Lenz C, Sommer P, et al. Focal impulse and rotor modulation ablation vs pulmonary vein  isolation for the treatment of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation: results from the FIRMAP AF study.  Europace. 2021;23:722–730. [PubMed: 33351076]  12. Sandler B, Kim MY , Sikkel MB, et al. Targeting the ectopy-triggering ganglionated plexuses  without pulmonary vein isolation prevents atrial fibrillation. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol.  2021;32:235–244. [PubMed: 33421265]  13. Kircher S, Arya A, Altmann D, et al. Individually tailored vs standardized substrate modification  during radiofrequency catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation: a randomized study. EP: Europace.  2018;20:1766–1775. 14. Lee KN, Roh SY , Baek YS, et al. Long-term clinical comparison of procedural end points  after pulmonary vein isolation in paroxysmal atrial fibrillation: elimination of nonpulmonary  et al. Page 210 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

vein triggers versus noninducibility. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2018;11:e005019. [PubMed:  29431632]  15. Di Biase L, Burkhardt JD, Mohanty P, et al. Left atrial appendage: an underrecognized trigger site  of atrial fibrillation. Circulation. 2010;122:109–118. [PubMed: 20606120]  16. Calkins H, Hindricks G, Cappato R, et al. 2017 HRS/EHRA/ECAS/APHRS/SOLAECE expert  consensus statement on catheter and surgical ablation of atrial fibrillation. Heart Rhythm.  2017;14:e275–e444. [PubMed: 28506916]  17. Kuo L, Frankel DS, Lin A, et al. PRECAF randomized controlled trial. Circ Arrhythm  Electrophysiol. 2021;14:e008993. [PubMed: 33301361]  18. Wang XH, Liu X, Sun YM, et al. Pulmonary vein isolation combined with superior vena cava  isolation for atrial fibrillation ablation: a prospective randomized study. Europace. 2008;10:600– 605. [PubMed: 18442966]  19. Darma A, Daneschnejad SS, Gaspar T, et al. Role of inducibility and its dynamic change in the  outcome of catheter ablation of atrial fibrillation: a single center prospective study. J Cardiovasc  Electrophysiol. 2020;31:705–711. [PubMed: 31943494]  20. Fiala M, Bulkova V , Sknouril L, et al. Sinus rhythm restoration and arrhythmia noninducibility  are major predictors of arrhythmia-free outcome after ablation for long-standing persistent atrial  fibrillation: a prospective study. Heart Rhythm. 2015;12:687–698. [PubMed: 25576779]  21. Santangeli P, Zado ES, Garcia FC, et al. Lack of prognostic value of atrial arrhythmia inducibility  and change in inducibility status after catheter ablation of atrial fibrillation. Heart Rhythm.  2018;15:660–665. [PubMed: 29056544]  22. Richter B, Gwechenberger M, Filzmoser P, et al. Is inducibility of atrial fibrillation after radio  frequency ablation really a relevant prognostic factor? Eur Heart J. 2006;27:2553–2559. [PubMed:  17038349]  23. Tohoku S, Fukunaga M, Nagashima M, et al. Clinical impact of eliminating nonpulmonary  vein triggers of atrial fibrillation and nonpulmonary vein premature atrial contractions at initial  ablation for persistent atrial fibrillation. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2021;32:224–234. [PubMed:  33270298]  24. Jiang R, Chen M, Fan J, et al. Efficacy of ablation index-guided pulmonary vein isolation  in patients with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2022;45:1186–1193.  [PubMed: 35939332]  25. Kawai S, Mukai Y , Inoue S, et al. Predictive value of the induction test with atrial burst pacing  with regard to long-term recurrence after ablation in persistent atrial fibrillation. J Arrhythm.  2019;35:223–229. [PubMed: 31007786]  26. Zeng LJ, Shi L, Tian Y , et al. Pace capture and adenosine triphosphate provocation are  complementary rather than mutually exclusive methods to ensure durable pulmonary vein  isolation. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2019;30:815–823. [PubMed: 30891845]  27. Choi Y , Kim SH, Kim JY , et al. Utility of acute arrhythmia termination as an ablation endpoint for  induced atrial tachyarrhythmia after complete pulmonary vein isolation during catheter ablation for  persistent atrial fibrillation. J Interv Card Electrophysiol. 2019;54:25–34. [PubMed: 30097788]  28. McLellan AJA, Prabhu S, V oskoboinik A, et al. Isolation of the posterior left atrium for patients  with persistent atrial fibrillation: routine adenosine challenge for dormant posterior left atrial  conduction improves long-term outcome. Europace. 2017;19:1958–1966. [PubMed: 28204434]  29. Page RL, Joglar JA, Caldwell MA, et al. 2015 ACC/AHA/HRS guideline for the management of  adult patients with supraventricular tachycardia: a report of the American College of Cardiology/ American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm  Society. Circulation. 2016;133:e506–e574. [PubMed: 26399663]  30. Di Biase L, Mohanty S, Trivedi C, et al. Stroke risk in patients with atrial fibrillation undergoing  electrical isolation of the left atrial appendage. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;74:1019–1028. [PubMed:  31439209]  31. Park JW, Yu HT, Kim TH, et al. Atrial fibrillation catheter ablation increases the left atrial pressure.  Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2019;12:e007073. [PubMed: 30917688]  et al. Page 211 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

32. Gibson DN, Di Biase L, Mohanty P, et al. Stiff left atrial syndrome after catheter ablation for atrial  fibrillation: clinical characterization, prevalence, and predictors. Heart Rhythm. 2011;8:1364– 1371. [PubMed: 21354332]  33. Kim YG, Shim J, Kim DH, et al. Characteristics of atrial fibrillation patients suffering  atrioesophageal fistula after radiofrequency catheter ablation. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol.  2018;29:1343–1351. [PubMed: 29927012]  34. Muller P, Dietrich JW, Halbfass P, et al. Higher incidence of esophageal lesions after ablation  of atrial fibrillation related to the use of esophageal temperature probes. Heart Rhythm.  2015;12:1464–1469. [PubMed: 25847474]  35. Mohanty S, Trivedi C, Della Rocca DG, et al. Thromboembolic risk in atrial fibrillation patients  with left atrial scar post-extensive ablation: a single-center experience. JACC Clin Electrophysiol.  2021;7:308–318. [PubMed: 33736751]  8.4.3. Management of Recurrent AF After Catheter Ablation 1. Packer DL, Mark DB, Robb RA, et al. Effect of catheter ablation vs antiarrhythmic drug therapy on  mortality, stroke, bleeding, and cardiac arrest among patients with atrial fibrillation: the CABANA  randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2019;321:1261–1274. [PubMed: 30874766]  2. Kuck KH, Fürnkranz A, Chun KR, et al. Cryoballoon or radiofrequency ablation for symptomatic  paroxysmal atrial fibrillation: reintervention, rehospitalization, and quality-of-life outcomes in the  FIRE AND ICE trial. Eur Heart J. 2016;37:2858–2865. [PubMed: 27381589]  3. Piccini JP, Sinner MF, Greiner MA, et al. Outcomes of Medicare beneficiaries undergoing catheter  ablation for atrial fibrillation. Circulation. 2012;126:2200–2207. [PubMed: 23019293]  4. Wokhlu A, Monahan KH, Hodge DO, et al. Long-term quality of life after ablation of atrial  fibrillation the impact of recurrence, symptom relief, and placebo effect. J Am Coll Cardiol.  2010;55:2308–2316. [PubMed: 20488300]  5. Calkins H, Reynolds MR, Spector P, et al. Treatment of atrial fibrillation with antiarrhythmic drugs  or radiofrequency ablation: two systematic literature reviews and meta-analyses. Circ Arrhythm  Electrophysiol. 2009;2:349–361. [PubMed: 19808490]  6. Ganesan AN, Shipp NJ, Brooks AG, et al. Long-term outcomes of catheter ablation of atrial  fibrillation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Am Heart Assoc. 2013;2:e004549. [PubMed:  23537812]  7. Bhargava M, Di Biase L, Mohanty P, et al. Impact of type of atrial fibrillation and repeat catheter  ablation on long-term freedom from atrial fibrillation: results from a multicenter study. Heart  Rhythm. 2009;6:1403–1412. [PubMed: 19716348]  8. Reddy YNV , El Sabbagh A, Packer D, et al. Evaluation of shortness of breath after atrial fibrillation  ablation-is there a stiff left atrium? Heart Rhythm. 2018;15:930–935. [PubMed: 29408677]  9. Szegedi N, Szeplaki G, Herczeg S, et al. Repeat procedure is a new independent predictor of  complications of atrial fibrillation ablation. Europace. 2019;21:732–737. [PubMed: 30689857]  10. Blomstrom-Lundqvist C, Gizurarson S, Schwieler J, et al. Effect of Catheter ablation vs  antiarrhythmic medication on quality of life in patients with atrial fibrillation: the CAPTAF  randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2019;321:1059–1068. [PubMed: 30874754]  11. Packer DL, Kowal RC, Wheelan KR, et al. Cryoballoon ablation of pulmonary veins for  paroxysmal atrial fibrillation: first results of the North American Arctic Front (STOP AF) pivotal  trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61:1713–1723. [PubMed: 23500312]  12. Pokushalov E, Romanov A, Artyomenko S, et al. Cryoballoon versus radiofrequency for  pulmonary vein re-isolation after a failed initial ablation procedure in patients with paroxysmal  atrial fibrillation. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2013;24:274–279. [PubMed: 23210695]  13. Kim D, Yu HT, Kim TH, et al. Electrical posterior box isolation in repeat ablation for atrial  fibrillation: a prospective randomized clinical study. JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2022;8:582–592.  [PubMed: 35589170]  14. Vamos M, Calkins H, Kowey PR, et al. Efficacy and safety of dronedarone in patients with a prior  ablation for atrial fibrillation/flutter: insights from the ATHENA study. Clin Cardiol. 2020;43:291– 297. [PubMed: 31872901]  et al. Page 212 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

15. Duytschaever M, Demolder A, Phlips T, et al. PulmOnary vein isolation With vs without  continued antiarrhythmic Drug trEatment in subjects with Recurrent Atrial Fibrillation (POWDER  AF): results from a multicentre randomized trial. Eur Heart J. 2018;39:1429–1437. [PubMed:  29211857]  16. Leong-Sit P, Roux JF, Zado E, et al. Antiarrhythmics after ablation of atrial fibrillation (5A Study):  six-month follow-up study. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2011;4:11–14. [PubMed: 21076158]  17. Schoene K, Sepehri Shamloo A, Sommer P, et al. Natural course of acquired pulmonary vein  stenosis after radiofrequency ablation for atrial fibrillationis routine follow-up imaging indicated  or not? J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2019;30:1786–1791. [PubMed: 31231906]  18. Jais P, Cauchemez B, Macle L, et al. Catheter ablation versus antiarrhythmic drugs for atrial  fibrillation: the A4 study. Circulation. 2008;118:2498–2505. [PubMed: 19029470]  19. Pokushalov E, Romanov A, De Melis M, et al. Progression of atrial fibrillation after a failed initial  ablation procedure in patients with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation: a randomized comparison of drug  therapy versus reablation. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2013;6:754–760. [PubMed: 23748210]  20. Roux JF, Zado E, Callans DJ, et al. Antiarrhythmics after ablation of atrial fibrillation (5A study).  Circulation. 2009;120:1036–1040. [PubMed: 19738139]  21. Kaitani K, Inoue K, Kobori A, et al. Efficacy of antiarrhythmic drugs short-term use after  catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation (EAST-AF) trial. Eur Heart J. 2016;37:610–618. [PubMed:  26417061]  22. Chen W, Liu H, Ling Z, et al. Efficacy of short-term antiarrhythmic drugs use after catheter  ablation of atrial fibrillation-a systematic review with meta-analyses and trial sequential analyses  of randomized controlled trials. PLoS One. 2016;11:e0156121. [PubMed: 27224469]  23. Xu B, Peng F, Tang W, et al. Short-term antiarrhythmic drugs after catheter ablation for atrial  fibrillation: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Ann Pharmacother. 2016;50:697–705.  [PubMed: 27317015]  24. Noseworthy PA, Van Houten HK, Sangaralingham LR, et al. Effect of antiarrhythmic drug  initiation on readmission after catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation. JACC Clin Electrophysiol.  2015;1:238–244. [PubMed: 29759312]  8.4.4. Anticoagulation Therapy Before and After Catheter Ablation 1. Di Biase L, Gaita F, Toso E, et al. Does periprocedural anticoagulation management of atrial  fibrillation affect the prevalence of silent thromboembolic lesion detected by diffusion cerebral  magnetic resonance imaging in patients undergoing radiofrequency atrial fibrillation ablation with  open irrigated catheters? Results from a prospective multicenter study. Heart Rhythm. 2014;11:791– 798. [PubMed: 24607716]  2. Cardoso R, Knijnik L, Bhonsale A, et al. An updated meta-analysis of novel oral anticoagulants  versus vitamin K antagonists for uninterrupted anticoagulation in atrial fibrillation catheter ablation.  Heart Rhythm. 2018;15:107–115. [PubMed: 28917562]  3. Kirchhof P, Haeusler KG, Blank B, et al. Apixaban in patients at risk of stroke undergoing atrial  fibrillation ablation. Eur Heart J. 2018;39:2942–2955. [PubMed: 29579168]  4. Kuwahara T, Abe M, Yamaki M, et al. Apixaban versus warfarin for the prevention of  periprocedural cerebral thromboembolism in atrial fibrillation ablation: multicenter prospective  randomized study. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2016;27:549–554. [PubMed: 26766541]  5. Calkins H, Willems S, Gerstenfeld EP, et al. Uninterrupted dabigatran versus warfarin for ablation in  atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2017;376:1627–1636. [PubMed: 28317415]  6. Hohnloser SH, Camm J, Cappato R, et al. Uninterrupted edoxaban vs vitamin K antagonists for  ablation of atrial fibrillation: the ELIMINATE-AF trial. Eur Heart J. 2019;40:3013–3021. [PubMed:  30976787]  7. Cappato R, Marchlinski FE, Hohnloser SH, et al. Uninterrupted rivaroxaban vs uninterrupted  vitamin K antagonists for catheter ablation in non-valvular atrial fibrillation. Eur Heart J.  2015;36:1805–1811. [PubMed: 25975659]  et al. Page 213 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

8. Reynolds MR, Allison JS, Natale A, et al. A prospective randomized trial of apixaban dosing during  atrial fibrillation ablation: the AEIOU trial. JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2018;4:580–588. [PubMed:  29798783]  9. Nogami A, Harada T, Sekiguchi Y , et al. Safety and efficacy of minimally interrupted dabigatran  vs uninterrupted warfarin therapy in adults undergoing atrial fibrillation catheter ablation: a  randomized clinical trial. JAMA Netw Open. 2019;2:e191994. [PubMed: 31002317]  10. van Vugt SPG, Westra SW, V olleberg R, et al. Meta-analysis of controlled studies on minimally  interrupted vs continuous use of non-vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulants in catheter ablation  for atrial fibrillation. Europace. 2021;23:1961–1969. [PubMed: 34333631]  11. Packer DL, Mark DB, Robb RA, et al. Effect of catheter ablation vs antiarrhythmic drug therapy on  mortality, stroke, bleeding, and cardiac arrest among patients with atrial fibrillation: the CABANA  randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2019;321:1261–1274. [PubMed: 30874766]  12. Steinberg BA, Hellkamp AS, Lokhnygina Y , et al. Higher risk of death and stroke in patients  with persistent vs paroxysmal atrial fibrillation: results from the ROCKET-AF Trial. Eur Heart J.  2015;36:288–296. [PubMed: 25209598]  13. Al-Khatib SM, Thomas L, Wallentin L, et al. Outcomes of apixaban vs warfarin by type and  duration of atrial fibrillation: results from the ARISTOTLE trial. Eur Heart J. 2013;34:2464–2471.  [PubMed: 23594592]  14. Uittenbogaart SB, Lucassen W AM, van Etten-Jamaludin FS, et al. Burden of atrial high-rate  episodes and risk of stroke: a systematic review. Europace. 2018;20:1420–1427. [PubMed:  29309554]  15. Reynolds MR, Gunnarsson CL, Hunter TD, et al. Health outcomes with catheter ablation or  antiarrhythmic drug therapy in atrial fibrillation: results of a propensity-matched analysis. Circ  Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2012;5:171–181. [PubMed: 22373904]  16. Friberg L, Tabrizi F, Englund A. Catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation is associated with lower  incidence of stroke and death: data from Swedish health registries. Eur Heart J. 2016;37:2478– 2487. [PubMed: 26984861]  17. Marrouche NF, Brachmann J, Andresen D, et al. Catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation with heart  failure. N Engl J Med. 2018;378:417–427. [PubMed: 29385358]  18. Piccini JP, Sinner MF, Greiner MA, et al. Outcomes of Medicare beneficiaries undergoing catheter  ablation for atrial fibrillation. Circulation. 2012;126:2200–2207. [PubMed: 23019293]  19. Calkins H, Hindricks G, Cappato R, et al. 2017 HRS/EHRA/ECAS/APHRS/SOLAECE expert  consensus statement on catheter and surgical ablation of atrial fibrillation. Heart Rhythm.  2017;14:e275–e444. [PubMed: 28506916]  20. Karasoy D, Gislason GH, Hansen J, et al. Oral anticoagulation therapy after radiofrequency  ablation of atrial fibrillation and the risk of thromboembolism and serious bleeding: long-term  follow-up in nationwide cohort of Denmark. Eur Heart J. 2015;36:307–314a. [PubMed: 25368205]  21. Noseworthy PA, Yao X, Deshmukh AJ, et al. Patterns of anticoagulation use and cardioembolic  risk after catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation. J Am Heart Assoc. 2015;4:e002597. [PubMed:  26541393]  22. Wazni OM, Boersma L, Healey JS, et al. Comparison of anticoagulation with left atrial appendage  closure after atrial fibrillation ablation: rationale and design of the OPTION randomized trial. Am  Heart J. 2022;251:35–42. [PubMed: 35526570]  8.4.5. Complications After AF Catheter Ablation 1. Deshmukh A, Patel NJ, Pant S, et al. In-hospital complications associated with catheter ablation  of atrial fibrillation in the United States between 2000 and 2010: analysis of 93 801 procedures.  Circulation. 2013;128:2104–2112. [PubMed: 24061087]  2. Steinbeck G, Sinner MF, Lutz M, et al. Incidence of complications related to catheter ablation  of atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter: a nationwide in-hospital analysis of administrative data for  Germany in 2014. Eur Heart J. 2018;39:4020–4029. [PubMed: 30085086]  et al. Page 214 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

3. Loring Z, Holmes DN, Matsouaka RA, et al. Procedural patterns and safety of atrial fibrillation  ablation: findings from Get With The Guidelines-Atrial Fibrillation. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol.  2020;13:e007944. [PubMed: 32703018]  4. Campbell ML, Larson J, Farid T, et al. Sex-based differences in procedural complications associated  with atrial fibrillation catheter ablation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Cardiovasc  Electrophysiol. 2020;31:3176–3186. [PubMed: 32966681]  5. Russo AM, Zeitler EP, Giczewska A, et al. Association between sex and treatment outcomes  of atrial fibrillation ablation versus drug therapy: results from the CABANA trial. Circulation.  2021;143:661–672. [PubMed: 33499668]  8.5. Role of Pacemakers and ICDs for the Prevention and Treatment of AF 1. Stambler BS, Ellenbogen KA, Orav EJ, et al. Predictors and clinical impact of atrial fibrillation after  pacemaker implantation in elderly patients treated with dual chamber versus ventricular pacing.  Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2003;26:2000–2007. [PubMed: 14516342]  2. Skanes AC, Krahn AD, Yee R, et al. Progression to chronic atrial fibrillation after pacing: the  Canadian Trial of Physiologic Pacing. CTOPP Investigators. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2001;38:167–172.  [PubMed: 11451268]  3. Hesselson AB, Parsonnet V , Bernstein AD, et al. Deleterious effects of long-term single-chamber  ventricular pacing in patients with sick sinus syndrome: the hidden benefits of dual-chamber pacing.  J Am Coll Cardiol. 1992;19:1542–1549. [PubMed: 1593051]  4. Andersen HR, Nielsen JC, Thomsen PE, et al. Long-term follow-up of patients from a randomised  trial of atrial versus ventricular pacing for sicksinus syndrome. Lancet. 1997;350:1210–1216.  [PubMed: 9652562]  5. Lamas GA, Lee KL, Sweeney MO, et al. Ventricular pacing or dual-chamber pacing for sinus node  dysfunction. N Engl J Med. 2002;346:1854–1862. [PubMed: 12063369]  6. Elkayam LU, Koehler JL, Sheldon TJ, et al. The influence of atrial and ventricular pacing on the  incidence of atrial fibrillation: a meta-analysis. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2011;34:1593–1599.  [PubMed: 21819434]  7. Gillis AM, Unterberg-Buchwald C, Schmidinger H, et al. Safety and efficacy of advanced atrial  pacing therapies for atrial tachyarrhythmias in patients with a new implantable dual chamber  cardioverter-defibrillator. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002;40:1653–1659. [PubMed: 12427419]  8. Lee MA, Weachter R, Pollak S, et al. The effect of atrial pacing therapies on atrial tachyarrhythmia  burden and frequency: results of a randomized trial in patients with bradycardia and atrial  tachyarrhythmias. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;41:1926–1932. [PubMed: 12798559]  9. Israel CW, Hügl B, Unterberg C, et al. Pace-termination and pacing for prevention of atrial  tachyarrhythmias: results from a multicenter study with an implantable device for atrial therapy.  J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2001;12:1121–1128. [PubMed: 11699520]  10. Gillis AM, Koehler J, Morck M, et al. High atrial antitachycardia pacing therapy efficacy is  associated with a reduction in atrial tachyarrhythmia burden in a subset of patients with sinus  node dysfunction and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. Heart Rhythm. 2005;2:791–796. [PubMed:  16051111]  11. Padeletti L, Purerfellner H, Mont L, et al. New-generation atrial antitachycardia pacing (Reactive  ATP) is associated with reduced risk of persistent or permanent atrial fibrillation in patients with  bradycardia: results from the MINERV A randomized multicenter international trial. Heart Rhythm.  2015;12:1717–1725. [PubMed: 25869753]  12. Boriani G, Tukkie R, Manolis AS, et al. Atrial antitachycardia pacing and managed ventricular  pacing in bradycardia patients with paroxysmal or persistent atrial tachyarrhythmias: the  MINERV A randomized multicentre international trial. Eur Heart J. 2014;35:2352–2362. [PubMed:  24771721]  13. Nakagomi T, Inden Y , Yanagisawa S, et al. Characteristics of successful reactive atrial-based  antitachycardia pacing in patients with cardiac implantable electronic devices: history of catheter  ablation of atrial fibrillation as a predictor of high treatment efficacy. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol.  2022;33:1515–1528. [PubMed: 35598302]  et al. Page 215 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

14. Zhu H, Li X, Wang Z, et al. New-onset atrial fibrillation following left bundle branch area pacing  vs right ventricular pacing: a two-centre prospective cohort study. Europace. 2022;25:121–125. 15. Ravi V , Beer D, Pietrasik GM, et al. Development of new-onset or progressive atrial fibrillation in  patients with permanent His bundle pacing versus right ventricular pacing: results from the RUSH  HBP registry. J Am Heart Assoc. 2020;9:e018478. [PubMed: 33174509]  16. Carlson MD, Ip J, Messenger J, et al. A new pacemaker algorithm for the treatment of atrial  fibrillation: results of the Atrial Dynamic Overdrive Pacing Trial (ADOPT). J Am Coll Cardiol.  2003;42:627–633. [PubMed: 12932592]  17. Hohnloser SH, Healey JS, Gold MR, et al. Atrial overdrive pacing to prevent atrial fibrillation:  insights from ASSERT. Heart Rhythm. 2012;9:1667–1673. [PubMed: 22698765]  18. Camm AJ, Sulke N, Edvardsson N, et al. Conventional and dedicated atrial overdrive pacing for the  prevention of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation: the AFTherapy study. Europace. 2007;9:1110–1118.  [PubMed: 18042619]  19. Munawar DA, Mahajan R, Agbaedeng TA, et al. Implication of ventricular pacing burden and atrial  pacing therapies on the progression of atrial fibrillation: a systematic review and meta-analysis of  randomized controlled trials. Heart Rhythm. 2019;16:1204–1214. [PubMed: 30772532]  20. Sweeney MO, Hellkamp AS, Ellenbogen KA, et al. Adverse effect of ventricular pacing on heart  failure and atrial fibrillation among patients with normal baseline QRS duration in a clinical trial  of pacemaker therapy for sinus node dysfunction. Circulation. 2003;107:2932–2937. [PubMed:  12782566]  21. Sweeney MO, Bank AJ, Nsah E, et al. Minimizing ventricular pacing to reduce atrial fibrillation in  sinus-node disease. N Engl J Med. 2007;357:1000–1008. [PubMed: 17804844]  22. Ricci RP, Botto GL, Benezet JM, et al. Association between ventricular pacing and persistent  atrial fibrillation in patients indicated to elective pacemaker replacement: results of the Prefer  for Elective Replacement MVP (PreFER MVP) randomized study. Heart Rhythm. 2015;12:2239– 2246. [PubMed: 26142300]  23. Shurrab M, Healey JS, Haj-Yahia S, et al. Reduction in unnecessary ventricular pacing fails to  affect hard clinical outcomes in patients with preserved left ventricular function: a meta-analysis.  Europace. 2017;19:282–288. [PubMed: 28175255]  24. Toff WD, Camm AJ, Skehan JD, et al. Single-chamber versus dual-chamber pacing for high-grade  atrioventricular block. N Engl J Med. 2005;353:145–155. [PubMed: 16014884]  25. Pastore G, Marcantoni L, Lanza D, et al. Occurrence of persistent atrial fibrillation during pacing  for sinus node disease: the influence of His bundle pacing versus managed ventricular pacing. J  Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2021;32:110–116. [PubMed: 33179400]  26. Singh JP, Cha YM, Lunati M, et al. Real-world behavior of CRT pacing using the AdaptivCRT  algorithm on patient outcomes: effect on mortality and atrial fibrillation incidence. J Cardiovasc  Electrophysiol. 2020;31:825–833. [PubMed: 32009263]  27. Hsu JC, Birnie D, Stadler RW, et al. Adaptive cardiac resynchronization therapy is associated with  decreased risk of incident atrial fibrillation compared to standard biventricular pacing: a real-world  analysis of 37 450 patients followed by remote monitoring. Heart Rhythm. 2019;16:983–989.  [PubMed: 31102750]  28. Gasparini M, Birnie D, Lemke B, et al. Adaptive cardiac resynchronization therapy reduces atrial  fibrillation incidence in heart failure patients with prolonged A V conduction: the adaptive CRT  randomized trial. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2019;12:e007260. [PubMed: 30991823]  8.6. Surgical Ablation 1. Huffman MD, Malaisrie SC, Karmali KN. Concomitant atrial fibrillation surgery for people  undergoing cardiac surgery. JAMA Cardiol. 2017;2:334–335. [PubMed: 28196179]  2. Huffman MD, Karmali KN, Berendsen MA, et al. Concomitant atrial fibrillation surgery for people  undergoing cardiac surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016;8:CD011814. 3. Gillinov M, Moskowitz AJ, Argenziano M. Surgical ablation for atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med.  2015;373:484. et al. Page 216 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

4. Noseworthy PA, Yao X, Deshmukh AJ, et al. Patterns of anticoagulation use and cardioembolic  risk after catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation. J Am Heart Assoc. 2015;4:e002597. [PubMed:  26541393]  5. Kress DC, Erickson L, Choudhuri I, et al. Comparative effectiveness of hybrid ablation versus  endocardial catheter ablation alone in patients with persistent atrial fibrillation. JACC Clin  Electrophysiol. 2017;3:341–349. [PubMed: 29759446]  6. Mannakkara NN, Porter B, Child N, et al. Convergent ablation for persistent atrial fibrillation:  outcomes from a single-centre real-world experience. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2022;63:ezac515.  [PubMed: 36346176]  7. Gersak B, Zembala MO, Muller D, et al. European experience of the convergent atrial  fibrillation procedure: multicenter outcomes in consecutive patients. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg.  2014;147:1411–1416. [PubMed: 23988287]  8. Cox JL, Schuessler RB, D'Agostino HJ Jr, et al. The surgical treatment of atrial fibrillation III  Development of a definitive surgical procedure. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1991;101:569–583.  [PubMed: 2008095]  9. McCarthy PM, Davidson CJ, Kruse J, et al. Prevalence of atrial fibrillation before cardiac surgery  and factors associated with concomitant ablation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2020;159:2245–2253  e2215. [PubMed: 31444073]  10. Musharbash FN, Schill MR, Sinn LA, et al. Performance of the Cox-maze IV procedure is  associated with improved long-term survival in patients with atrial fibrillation undergoing cardiac  surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2018;155:159–170. [PubMed: 29056264]  11. Iribarne A, DiScipio AW, McCullough JN, et al. Surgical atrial fibrillation ablation improves longterm survival: a multicenter analysis. Ann Thorac Surg. 2019;107:135–142. [PubMed: 30300644]  12. Suwalski P, Kowalewski M, Jasinski M, et al. Survival after surgical ablation for atrial fibrillation  in mitral valve surgery: analysis from the Polish National Registry of Cardiac Surgery Procedures  (KROK). J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2019;157:1007–1018.e1004. [PubMed: 30314688]  13. Malaisrie SC, McCarthy PM, Kruse J, et al. Ablation of atrial fibrillation during coronary  artery bypass grafting: late outcomes in a Medicare population. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg.  2021;161:1251–1261 e1251. [PubMed: 31952824]  14. Badhwar V , Rankin JS, Ad N, et al. Surgical ablation of atrial fibrillation in the United  States: trends and propensity matched outcomes. Ann Thorac Surg. 2017;104:493–500. [PubMed:  28669501]  15. Eitel C, Koch J, Sommer P, et al. Novel oral anticoagulants in a real-world cohort of patients  undergoing catheter ablation of atrial fibrillation. Europace. 2013;15:1587–1593. [PubMed:  23703362]  16. DeLurgio DB, Crossen KJ, Gill J, et al. Hybrid convergent procedure for the treatment of persistent  and long-standing persistent atrial fibrillation: results of CONVERGE clinical trial. Circ Arrhythm  Electrophysiol. 2020;13:e009288. [PubMed: 33185144]  9.1. General Considerations for AF and HF 1. Melenovsky V , Hwang SJ, Redfield MM, et al. Left atrial remodeling and function in advanced heart  failure with preserved or reduced ejection fraction. Circ Heart Fail. 2015;8:295–303. [PubMed:  25593126]  2. Tsang TS, Gersh BJ, Appleton CP, et al. Left ventricular diastolic dysfunction as a predictor of the  first diagnosed nonvalvular atrial fibrillation in 840 elderly men and women. J Am Coll Cardiol.  2002;40:1636–1644. [PubMed: 12427417]  3. Rosenberg MA, Gottdiener JS, Heckbert SR, et al. Echocardiographic diastolic parameters and risk  of atrial fibrillation: the Cardiovascular Health Study. Eur Heart J. 2012;33:904–912. [PubMed:  21990265]  4. Ariyaratnam JP, Lau DH, Sanders P, et al. Atrial fibrillation and heart failure: epidemiology,  pathophysiology, prognosis, and management. Card Electrophysiol Clin. 2021;13:47–62. [PubMed:  33516407]  et al. Page 217 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

5. Santhanakrishnan R, Wang N, Larson MG, et al. Atrial fibrillation begets heart failure and  vice versa: temporal associations and differences in preserved versus reduced ejection fraction.  Circulation. 2016;133:484–492. [PubMed: 26746177]  6. Mamas MA, Caldwell JC, Chacko S, et al. A meta-analysis of the prognostic significance of atrial  fibrillation in chronic heart failure. Eur J Heart Fail. 2009;11:676–683. [PubMed: 19553398]  7. Sartipy U, Dahlstrom U, Fu M, et al. Atrial fibrillation in heart failure with preserved, mid-range,  and reduced ejection fraction. JACC Heart Fail. 2017;5:565–574. [PubMed: 28711451]  8. Kotecha D, Chudasama R, Lane DA, et al. Atrial fibrillation and heart failure due to reduced versus  preserved ejection fraction: a systematic review and meta-analysis of death and adverse outcomes.  Int J Cardiol. 2016;203:660–666. [PubMed: 26580351]  9. Zafrir B, Lund LH, Laroche C, et al. Prognostic implications of atrial fibrillation in heart failure  with reduced, mid-range, and preserved ejection fraction: a report from 14 964 patients in the  European Society of Cardiology Heart Failure Long-Term Registry. Eur Heart J. 2018;39:4277– 4284. [PubMed: 30325423]  9.2. Management of AF in Patients With HF 1. Rillig A, Magnussen C, Ozga AK, et al. Early rhythm control therapy in patients with atrial  fibrillation and heart failure. Circulation. 2021;144:845–858. [PubMed: 34328366]  2. Brachmann J, Sohns C, Andresen D, et al. Atrial fibrillation burden and clinical outcomes in heart  failure: the CASTLE-AF trial. JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2021;7:594–603. [PubMed: 33640355]  3. Chen S, Pürerfellner H, Meyer C, et al. Rhythm control for patients with atrial fibrillation  complicated with heart failure in the contemporary era of catheter ablation: a stratified pooled  analysis of randomized data. Eur Heart J. 2020;41:2863–2873. [PubMed: 31298266]  4. Di Biase L, Mohanty P, Mohanty S, et al. Ablation versus amiodarone for treatment of persistent  atrial fibrillation in patients with congestive heart failure and an implanted device: results from the  AATAC multicenter randomized trial. Circulation. 2016;133:1637–1644. [PubMed: 27029350]  5. Hunter RJ, Berriman TJ, Diab I, et al. A randomized controlled trial of catheter ablation  versus medical treatment of atrial fibrillation in heart failure (the CAMTAF trial). Circ Arrhythm  Electrophysiol. 2014;7:31–38. [PubMed: 24382410]  6. Jones DG, Haldar SK, Hussain W, et al. A randomized trial to assess catheter ablation versus  rate control in the management of persistent atrial fibrillation in heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol.  2013;61:1894–1903. [PubMed: 23500267]  7. Kuck KH, Merkely B, Zahn R, et al. Catheter ablation versus best medical therapy in patients  with persistent atrial fibrillation and congestive heart failure: the randomized AMICA trial. Circ  Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2019;12:e007731. [PubMed: 31760819]  8. MacDonald MR, Connelly DT, Hawkins NM, et al. Radiofrequency ablation for persistent atrial  fibrillation in patients with advanced heart failure and severe left ventricular systolic dysfunction: a  randomised controlled trial. Heart. 2011;97:740–747. [PubMed: 21051458]  9. Marrouche NF, Brachmann J, Andresen D, et al. Catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation with heart  failure. N Engl J Med. 2018;378:417–427. [PubMed: 29385358]  10. Pan KL, Wu YL, Lee M, et al. Catheter ablation compared with medical therapy for atrial  fibrillation with heart failure: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled  trials. Int J Med Sci. 2021;18:1325–1331. [PubMed: 33628087]  11. Parkash R, Wells GA, Rouleau J, et al. Randomized ablation-based rhythm-control versus ratecontrol trial in patients with heart failure and atrial fibrillation: results from the RAFT-AF trial.  Circulation. 2022;145:1693–1704. [PubMed: 35313733]  12. Prabhu S, Taylor AJ, Costello BT, et al. Catheter ablation versus medical rate control in atrial  fibrillation and systolic dysfunction: the CAMERA-MRI study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;70:1949– 1961. [PubMed: 28855115]  13. Turagam MK, Garg J, Whang W, et al. Catheter ablation of atrial fibrillation in patients with  heart failure: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Ann Intern Med. 2019;170:41–50.  [PubMed: 30583296]  et al. Page 218 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

14. Packer DL, Piccini JP, Monahan KH, et al. Ablation versus drug therapy for atrial fibrillation  in heart failure: results from the CABANA trial. Circulation. 2021;143:1377–1390. [PubMed:  33554614]  15. Siddiqui MU, Junarta J, Riley JM, et al. Catheter ablation in patients with atrial fibrillation and  heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Arrhythm.  2022;38:981–990. [PubMed: 36524044]  16. Khand AU, Rankin AC, Martin W, et al. Carvedilol alone or in combination with digoxin for the  management of atrial fibrillation in patients with heart failure? J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;42:1944– 1951. [PubMed: 14662257]  17. Kotecha D, Bunting KV , Gill SK, et al. Effect of digoxin vs bisoprolol for heart rate control  in atrial fibrillation on patient-reported quality of life: the RATE-AF randomized clinical trial.  JAMA. 2020;324:2497–2508. [PubMed: 33351042]  18. Clemo HF, Wood MA, Gilligan DM, et al. Intravenous amiodarone for acute heart rate control in  the critically ill patient with atrial tachyarrhythmias. Am J Cardiol. 1998;81:594–598. [PubMed:  9514456]  19. Delle Karth G, Geppert A, Neunteufl T, et al. Amiodarone versus diltiazem for rate control in  critically ill patients with atrial tachyarrhythmias. Crit Care Med. 2001;29:1149–1153. [PubMed:  11395591]  20. Brignole M, Menozzi C, Gianfranchi L, et al. Assessment of atrioventricular junction ablation and  VVIR pacemaker versus pharmacological treatment in patients with heart failure and chronic atrial  fibrillation: a randomized, controlled study. Circulation. 1998;98:953–960. [PubMed: 9737514]  21. Kay GN, Ellenbogen KA, Giudici M, et al. The Ablate and Pace Trial: a prospective study  of catheter ablation of the A V conduction system and permanent pacemaker implantation for  treatment of atrial fibrillation APT Investigators. J Interv Card Electrophysiol. 1998;2:121–135.  [PubMed: 9870004]  22. Weerasooriya R, Davis M, Powell A, et al. The Australian Intervention Randomized Control of  Rate in Atrial Fibrillation Trial (AIRCRAFT). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;41:1697–1702. [PubMed:  12767649]  23. Brignole M, Pentimalli F, Palmisano P, et al. A V junction ablation and cardiac resynchronization  for patients with permanent atrial fibrillation and narrow QRS: the APAF-CRT mortality trial. Eur  Heart J. 2021;42:4731–4739. [PubMed: 34453840]  24. Ganesan AN, Brooks AG, Roberts-Thomson KC, et al. Role of A V nodal ablation in cardiac  resynchronization in patients with coexistent atrial fibrillation and heart failure: a systematic  review. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59:719–726. [PubMed: 22340263]  25. Mustafa U, Atkins J, Mina G, et al. Outcomes of cardiac resynchronisation therapy in patients with  heart failure with atrial fibrillation: a systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies.  Open Heart. 2019;6:e000937. [PubMed: 31217991]  26. Gasparini M, Kloppe A, Lunati M, et al. Atrioventricular junction ablation in patients with  atrial fibrillation treated with cardiac resynchronization therapy: positive impact on ventricular  arrhythmias, implantable cardioverter-defibrillator therapies and hospitalizations. Eur J Heart Fail.  2018;20:1472–1481. [PubMed: 29251799]  27. Nerheim P, Birger-Botkin S, Piracha L, et al. Heart failure and sudden death in patients with  tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy and recurrent tachycardia. Circulation. 2004;110:247–252.  [PubMed: 15226218]  28. Nedios S, Sommer P, Dagres N, et al. Long-term follow-up after atrial fibrillation ablation in  patients with impaired left ventricular systolic function: the importance of rhythm and rate control.  Heart Rhythm. 2014;11:344–351. [PubMed: 24374320]  29. Roy D, Talajic M, Nattel S, et al. Rhythm control versus rate control for atrial fibrillation and heart  failure. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:2667–2677. [PubMed: 18565859]  30. Van Gelder IC, Groenveld HF, Crijns HJ, et al. Lenient versus strict rate control in patients with  atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:1363–1373. [PubMed: 20231232]  31. Silvet H, Hawkins LA, Jacobson AK. Heart rate control in patients with chronic atrial fibrillation  and heart failure. Congest Heart Fail. 2013;19:25–28. [PubMed: 22958623]  et al. Page 219 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

32. Morina-Vazquez P, Moraleda-Salas MT, Arce-Leon A, et al. Effectiveness and safety of A V node  ablation after His bundle pacing in patients with uncontrolled atrial arrhythmias. Pacing Clin  Electrophysiol. 2021;44:1004–1009. [PubMed: 33904179]  33. Pillai A, Kolominsky J, Koneru JN, et al. Atrioventricular junction ablation in patients with  conduction system pacing leads: a comparison of His-bundle vs left bundle branch area pacing  leads. Heart Rhythm. 2022;19:1116–1123. [PubMed: 35351624]  34. Vijayaraman P, Mathew AJ, Naperkowski A, et al. Conduction system pacing versus conventional  pacing in patients undergoing atrioventricular node ablation: nonrandomized, on-treatment  comparison. Heart Rhythm O2. 2022;3:368–376. [PubMed: 36097467]  35. Vijayaraman P, Subzposh FA, Naperkowski A. Atrioventricular node ablation and His bundle  pacing. Europace. 2017;19:iv10–iv16. [PubMed: 29220422]  36. Goldstein RE, Boccuzzi SJ, Cruess D, et al. Diltiazem increases late-onset congestive heart  failure in postinfarction patients with early reduction in ejection fraction. The Adverse  Experience Committee; and the Multicenter Diltiazem Postinfarction Research Group. Circulation.  1991;83:52–60. [PubMed: 1984898]  37. Kober L, Torp-Pedersen C, McMurray JJ, et al. Increased mortality after dronedarone therapy for  severe heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:2678–2687. [PubMed: 18565860]  38. Calo L, De Ruvo E, Sette A, et al. Tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy: mechanisms of heart  failure and clinical implications. J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown). 2007;8:138–143. [PubMed:  17312430]  39. Gopinathannair R, Etheridge SP, Marchlinski FE, et al. Arrhythmia-induced cardiomyopathies:  mechanisms, recognition, and management. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;66:1714–1728. [PubMed:  26449143]  40. Shelton RJ, Clark AL, Goode K, et al. A randomised, controlled study of rate versus rhythm  control in patients with chronic atrial fibrillation and heart failure: (CAFE-II Study). Heart.  2009;95:924–930. [PubMed: 19282313]  41. Vernooy K, Dijkman B, Cheriex EC, et al. Ventricular remodeling during long-term right  ventricular pacing following His bundle ablation. Am J Cardiol. 2006;97:1223–1227. [PubMed:  16616030]  42. Tops LF, Schalij MJ, Holman ER, et al. Right ventricular pacing can induce ventricular  dyssynchrony in patients with atrial fibrillation after atrioventricular node ablation. J Am Coll  Cardiol. 2006;48:1642–1648. [PubMed: 17045901]  43. Gopinathannair R, Chen LY , Chung MK, et al. Managing atrial fibrillation in patients with heart  failure and reduced ejection fraction: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association.  Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2021;14:e000078. 44. Ziff OJ, Lane DA, Samra M, et al. Safety and efficacy of digoxin: systematic review and metaanalysis of observational and controlled trial data. BMJ. 2015;351:h4451. [PubMed: 26321114]  45. Rathore SS, Curtis JP, Wang Y , et al. Association of serum digoxin concentration and outcomes in  patients with heart failure. JAMA. 2003;289:871–878. [PubMed: 12588271]  46. Hou ZY , Chang MS, Chen CY , et al. Acute treatment of recent-onset atrial fibrillation and flutter  with a tailored dosing regimen of intravenous amiodarone A randomized, digoxin-controlled study.  Eur Heart J. 1995;16:521–528. [PubMed: 7671898]  47. Nakagawa H, Jackman WM, Scherlag BJ, et al. Pulmonary vein isolation during atrial fibrillation:  insight into the mechanism of pulmonary vein firing. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2003;14:261– 262. [PubMed: 12716107]  48. Chatterjee NA, Upadhyay GA, Ellenbogen KA, et al. Atrioventricular nodal ablation in atrial  fibrillation: a meta-analysis of biventricular vs right ventricular pacing mode. Eur J Heart Fail.  2012;14:661–667. [PubMed: 22436544]  49. Baudo M, D'Ancona G, Trinca F, et al. Atrioventricular node ablation and pacing for atrial  tachyarrhythmias: a meta-analysis of postoperative outcomes. Int J Cardiol. 2022;363:80–86.  [PubMed: 35764203]  50. Linde C, Leclercq C, Rex S, et al. Long-term benefits of biventricular pacing in congestive heart  failure: results from the MUltisite STimulation in cardiomyopathy (MUSTIC) study. J Am Coll  Cardiol. 2002;40:111–118. [PubMed: 12103264]  et al. Page 220 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

51. Upadhyay GA, Choudhry NK, Auricchio A, et al. Cardiac resynchronization in patients with atrial  fibrillation: a meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008;52:1239–1246.  [PubMed: 18926327]  52. Wilton SB, Leung AA, Ghali W A, et al. Outcomes of cardiac resynchronization therapy in patients  with versus those without atrial fibrillation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Heart Rhythm.  2011;8:1088–1094. [PubMed: 21338711]  53. Hayes DL, Boehmer JP, Day JD, et al. Cardiac resynchronization therapy and the relationship  of percent biventricular pacing to symptoms and survival. Heart Rhythm. 2011;8:1469–1475.  [PubMed: 21699828]  54. Van Gelder IC, Groenveld HF, Crijns HJ, et al. Lenient versus strict rate control in patients with  atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:1363–1373. [PubMed: 20231232]  55. van Gelder IC, Phan HM, Wilkoff BL, et al. Prognostic significance of atrial arrhythmias in a  primary prevention ICD population. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2011;34:1070–1079. [PubMed:  21605131]  56. Boriani G, Gasparini M, Landolina M, et al. Incidence and clinical relevance of uncontrolled  ventricular rate during atrial fibrillation in heart failure patients treated with cardiac  resynchronization therapy. Eur J Heart Fail. 2011;13:868–876. [PubMed: 21558331]  57. Jandali MB. Safety of intravenous diltiazem in reduced ejection fraction heart failure with rapid  atrial fibrillation. Clin Drug Investig. 2018;38:503–508. 58. Hasbrouck M, Nguyen TT. Acute management of atrial fibrillation in congestive heart failure  with reduced ejection fraction in the emergency department. Am J Emerg Med. 2022;58:39–42.  [PubMed: 35623182]  59. Figulla HR, Gietzen F, Zeymer U, et al. Diltiazem improves cardiac function and exercise  capacity in patients with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy Results of the Diltiazem in Dilated  Cardiomyopathy Trial. Circulation. 1996;94:346–352. [PubMed: 8759075]  60. Roy D, Talajic M, Nattel S, et al. Rhythm control versus rate control for atrial fibrillation and heart  failure. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:2667–2677. [PubMed: 18565859]  10.1. Management of Early Onset AF, Including Genetic Testing 1. Yalin K, Ikitimur B, Aksu T, et al. Catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation in patients </=30 years of  age. Am J Cardiol. 2022;166:53–57. [PubMed: 34973688]  2. Ceresnak SR, Liberman L, Silver ES, et al. Lone atrial fibrillation in the young - perhaps not so  “lone”? J Pediatr. 2013;162:827–831. [PubMed: 23092527]  3. Sauer WH, Alonso C, Zado E, et al. Atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia in patients referred  for atrial fibrillation ablation: response to ablation that incorporates slow-pathway modification.  Circulation. 2006;114:191–195. [PubMed: 16831982]  4. Yoneda ZT, Anderson KC, Quintana JA, et al. Early-onset atrial fibrillation and the prevalence  of rare variants in cardiomyopathy and arrhythmia genes. JAMA Cardiol. 2021;6:1371–1379.  [PubMed: 34495297]  5. Goodyer WR, Dunn K, Caleshu C, et al. Broad genetic testing in a clinical setting uncovers a high  prevalence of titin loss-of-function variants in very early onset atrial fibrillation. Circ Genom Precis  Med. 2019;12:e002713. [PubMed: 31638414]  6. Perez MV , Mahaffey KW, Hedlin H, et al. Large-scale assessment of a smartwatch to identify atrial  fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2019;381:1909–1917. [PubMed: 31722151]  10.2. Athletes 1. Mandsager KT, Phelan DM, Diab M, et al. Outcomes of pulmonary vein isolation in athletes. JACC  Clin Electrophysiol. 2020;6:1265–1274. [PubMed: 33092753]  2. Toso E, Gagliardi M, Peyracchia M, et al. Long-term efficacy and impact on quality of life of atrial  fibrillation catheter ablation in competitive athletes. J Sports Med Phys Fitness. 2022;62:1266– 1271. [PubMed: 34931787]  et al. Page 221 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

3. Azarbal F, Stefanick ML, Salmoirago-Blotcher E, et al. Obesity, physical activity, and  their interaction in incident atrial fibrillation in postmenopausal women. J Am Heart Assoc.  2014;3:e001127. [PubMed: 25142057]  4. Mozaffarian D, Furberg CD, Psaty BM, et al. Physical activity and incidence of atrial fibrillation in  older adults: the cardiovascular health study. Circulation. 2008;118:800–807. [PubMed: 18678768]  5. Newman W, Parry-Williams G, Wiles J, et al. Risk of atrial fibrillation in athletes: a systematic  review and meta-analysis. Br J Sports Med. 2021;55:1233–1238. [PubMed: 34253538]  6. Ayinde H, Schweizer ML, Crabb V , et al. Age modifies the risk of atrial fibrillation among  athletes: a systematic literature review and meta-analysis. Int J Cardiol Heart Vasc. 2018;18:25–29.  [PubMed: 29556526]  7. Trivedi SJ, Claessen G, Stefani L, et al. Differing mechanisms of atrial fibrillation in athletes  and non-athletes: alterations in atrial structure and function. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging.  2020;21:1374–1383. [PubMed: 32757003]  8. La Gerche A, Inder WJ, Roberts TJ, et al. Relationship between inflammatory cytokines and  indices of cardiac dysfunction following intense endurance exercise. PLoS One. 2015;10:e0130031.  [PubMed: 26070197]  9. Estes NAM 3rd, Madias C. Atrial fibrillation in athletes: a lesson in the virtue of moderation. JACC  Clin Electrophysiol. 2017;3:921–928. [PubMed: 29759716]  10.3. Management Considerations in Patients With AF and Obesity 1. Chung MK, Eckhardt LL, Chen LY , et al. Lifestyle and risk factor modification for reduction  of atrial fibrillation: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation.  2020;141:e750–e772. [PubMed: 32148086]  2. Wang TJ, Parise H, Levy D, et al. Obesity and the risk of new-onset atrial fibrillation. JAMA.  2004;292:2471–2477. [PubMed: 15562125]  3. Wong CX, Sun MT, Odutayo A, et al. Associations of Epicardial, abdominal, and overall adiposity  with atrial fibrillation. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2016;9:e004378. [PubMed: 27923804]  4. Wong CX, Sullivan T, Sun MT, et al. Obesity and the risk of incident, postoperative, and  post-ablation atrial fibrillation: a meta-analysis of 626 603 individuals in 51 studies. JACC Clin  Electrophysiol. 2015;1:139–152. [PubMed: 29759357]  10.4. Anticoagulation Considerations in Patients With Class III Obesity 1. Barakat AF, Jain S, Masri A, et al. Outcomes of direct oral anticoagulants in atrial fibrillation  patients across different body mass index categories. JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2021;7:649–658.  [PubMed: 33812834]  2. Malik AH, Yandrapalli S, Shetty S, et al. Impact of weight on the efficacy and safety of directacting oral anticoagulants in patients with non-valvular atrial fibrillation: a meta-analysis. Europace.  2020;22:361–367. [PubMed: 31985781]  3. Hohnloser SH, Fudim M, Alexander JH, et al. Efficacy and safety of apixaban versus warfarin  in patients with atrial fibrillation and extremes in body weight. Circulation. 2019;139:2292–2300.  [PubMed: 30773022]  4. Boriani G, Ruff CT, Kuder JF, et al. Relationship between body mass index and outcomes in patients  with atrial fibrillation treated with edoxaban or warfarin in the ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48 trial. Eur  Heart J. 2019;40:1541–1550. [PubMed: 30624719]  5. Balla SR, Cyr DD, Lokhnygina Y , et al. Relation of risk of stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation  to body mass index (from patients treated with rivaroxaban and warfarin in the rivaroxaban once  daily oral direct factor Xa inhibition compared with vitamin K Antagonism for Prevention of Stroke  and Embolism Trial in Atrial Fibrillation Trial). Am J Cardiol. 2017;119:1989–1996. [PubMed:  28477860]  6. Mahlmann A, Gehrisch S, Beyer-Westendorf J. Pharmacokinetics of rivaroxaban after bariatric  surgery: a case report. J Thromb Thrombolysis. 2013;36:533–535. [PubMed: 23417780]  et al. Page 222 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

7. Leong R, Chu DK, Crowther MA, et al. Direct oral anticoagulants after bariatric surgery-what is the  evidence? J Thromb Haemost. 2022;20:1988–2000. [PubMed: 35844166]  10.5. AF and VHD 1. Petty GW, Khandheria BK, Whisnant JP, et al. Predictors of cerebrovascular events and death  among patients with valvular heart disease: a population-based study. Stroke. 2000;31:2628–2635.  [PubMed: 11062286]  10.6. WPW and Preexcitation Syndromes 1. Page RL, Joglar JA, Caldwell MA, et al. 2015 ACC/AHA/HRS guideline for the management of  adult patients with supraventricular tachycardia: a report of the American College of Cardiology/ American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm  Society. Circulation. 2016;133:e506–e574. [PubMed: 26399663]  2. Roth A, Elkayam I, Shapira I, et al. Effectiveness of prehospital synchronous direct-current  cardioversion for supraventricular tachyarrhythmias causing unstable hemodynamic states. Am J  Cardiol. 2003;91:489–491. [PubMed: 12586276]  3. Pappone C, Vicedomini G, Manguso F, et al. Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome in the era of catheter  ablation: insights from a registry study of 2169 patients. Circulation. 2014;130:811–819. [PubMed:  25052405]  4. Kugler JD, Danford DA, Houston K, et al. Radiofrequency catheter ablation for paroxysmal  supraventricular tachycardia in children and adolescents without structural heart disease Pediatric  EP Society, Radiofrequency Catheter Ablation Registry. Am J Cardiol. 1997;80:1438–1443.  [PubMed: 9399718]  5. Calkins H, Langberg J, Sousa J, et al. Radiofrequency catheter ablation of accessory atrioventricular  connections in 250 patients Abbreviated therapeutic approach to Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome.  Circulation. 1992;85:1337–1346. [PubMed: 1555278]  6. Jackman WM, Wang XZ, Friday KJ, et al. Catheter ablation of accessory atrioventricular pathways  (Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome) by radiofrequency current. N Engl J Med. 1991;324:1605– 1611. [PubMed: 2030716]  7. Belhassen B, Rogowski O, Glick A, et al. Radiofrequency ablation of accessory pathways: a 14  year experience at the Tel Aviv Medical Center in 508 patients. Isr Med Assoc J. 2007;9:265–270.  [PubMed: 17491219]  8. Sellers TD Jr, Campbell RW, Bashore TM, et al. Effects of procainamide and quinidine sulfate in the  Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome. Circulation. 1977;55:15–22. [PubMed: 830205]  9. Glatter KA, Dorostkar PC, Yang Y , et al. Electrophysiological effects of ibutilide in patients with  accessory pathways. Circulation. 2001;104:1933–1939. [PubMed: 11602497]  10. Boriani G, Biffi M, Frabetti L, et al. Ventricular fibrillation after intravenous amiodarone in WolffParkinson-White syndrome with atrial fibrillation. Am Heart J. 1996;131:1214–1216. [PubMed:  8644602]  11. Kim RJ, Gerling BR, Kono AT, et al. Precipitation of ventricular fibrillation by intravenous  diltiazem and metoprolol in a young patient with occult Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome. Pacing  Clin Electrophysiol. 2008;31:776–779. [PubMed: 18507555]  12. Sellers TD Jr, Bashore TM, Gallagher JJ. Digitalis in the pre-excitation syndrome Analysis during  atrial fibrillation. Circulation. 1977;56:260–267. [PubMed: 872319]  13. Simonian SM, Lotfipour S, Wall C, et al. Challenging the superiority of amiodarone for rate  control in Wolff-Parkinson-White and atrial fibrillation. Intern Emerg Med. 2010;5:421–426.  [PubMed: 20437113]  14. Gulamhusein S, Ko P, Carruthers SG, et al. Acceleration of the ventricular response during atrial  fibrillation in the Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome after verapamil. Circulation. 1982;65:348– 354. [PubMed: 7053894]  15. Munger TM, Packer DL, Hammill SC, et al. A population study of the natural history of WolffParkinson-White syndrome in Olmsted County, Minnesota, 1953–1989. Circulation. 1993;87:866– 873. [PubMed: 8443907]  et al. Page 223 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

16. Fukatani M, Tanigawa M, Mori M, et al. Prediction of a fatal atrial fibrillation in patients  with asymptomatic Wolff-Parkinson-White pattern. Jpn Circ J. 1990;54:1331–1339. [PubMed:  2277412]  17. Pietersen AH, Andersen ED, Sandoe E. Atrial fibrillation in the Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome.  Am J Cardiol. 1992;70:38A–43A. 18. Klein GJ, Bashore TM, Sellers TD, et al. Ventricular fibrillation in the WolffParkinson-White  syndrome. N Engl J Med. 1979;301:1080–1085. [PubMed: 492252]  19. Pappone C, Santinelli V , Manguso F, et al. A randomized study of prophylactic catheter ablation in  asymptomatic patients with the Wolff-ParkinsonWhite syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2003;349:1803– 1811. [PubMed: 14602878]  20. A randomized, placebo-controlled trial of propafenone in the prophylaxis of paroxysmal  supraventricular tachycardia and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. UK Propafenone PSVT Study  Group. Circulation. 1995;92:2550–2557. [PubMed: 7586356]  21. Chimienti M, Cullen MT Jr, Casadei G. Safety of flecainide versus propafenone for the longterm management of symptomatic paroxysmal supraventricular tachyarrhythmias Report from  the Flecainide and Propafenone Italian Study (FAPIS) Group. Eur Heart J. 1995;16:1943–1951.  [PubMed: 8682031]  10.7. Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM) 1. Ommen SR, Mital S, Burke MA, et al. 2020 AHA/ACC guideline for the diagnosis and treatment  of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a report of the American College of Cardiology/ American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation.  2020;142:e558–e631. [PubMed: 33215931]  2. Guttmann OP, Rahman MS, O'Mahony C, et al. Atrial fibrillation and thromboembolism in  patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: systematic review. Heart. 2014;100:465–472. [PubMed:  24014282]  3. Kubo T, Baba Y , Ochi Y , et al. Clinical significance of new-onset atrial fibrillation in patients with  hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. ESC Heart Fail. 2021;8:5022–5030. [PubMed: 34472710]  4. Fauchier L, Bisson A, Bodin A, et al. Ischemic stroke in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy  according to presence or absence of atrial fibrillation. Stroke. 2022;53:497–504. [PubMed:  34601900]  5. Alphonse P, Virk S, Collins J, et al. Prognostic impact of atrial fibrillation in hypertrophic  cardiomyopathy: a systematic review. Clin Res Cardiol. 2021;110:544–554. [PubMed: 32880676]  6. Hsu JC, Huang YT, Lin LY . Stroke risk in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients with atrial  fibrillation: a nationwide database study. Aging (Albany NY). 2020;12:24219–24227. [PubMed:  33226371]  7. Rozen G, Elbaz-Greener G, Marai I, et al. Utilization and complications of catheter ablation for  atrial fibrillation in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Heart Assoc. 2020;9:e015721.  [PubMed: 32573325]  10.8. Adult Congenital Heart Disease (ACHD) 1. Escudero C, Khairy P, Sanatani S. Electrophysiologic considerations in congenital heart disease and  their relationship to heart failure. Can J Cardiol. 2013;29:821–829. [PubMed: 23642334]  2. Miyazaki A, Negishi J, Hayama Y , et al. Etiology of atrial fibrillation in patients with complex  congenital heart disease - for a better treatment strategy. J Cardiol. 2020;76:438–445. [PubMed:  32703716]  3. Mylotte D, Pilote L, Ionescu-Ittu R, et al. Specialized adult congenital heart disease care: the impact  of policy on mortality. Circulation. 2014;129:1804–1812. [PubMed: 24589851]  4. Liang JJ, Frankel DS, Parikh V , et al. Safety and outcomes of catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation  in adults with congenital heart disease: a multicenter registry study. Heart Rhythm. 2019;16:846– 852. [PubMed: 30593868]  et al. Page 224 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

5. Fischer AJ, Enders D, Wasmer K, et al. Impact of specialized electrophysiological care on the  outcome of catheter ablation for supraventricular tachycardias in adults with congenital heart  disease: independent risk factors and gender aspects. Heart Rhythm. 2021;18:1852–1859. [PubMed:  34271174]  6. Koyak Z, Kroon B, de Groot JR, et al. Efficacy of antiarrhythmic drugs in adults with congenital  heart disease and supraventricular tachycardias. Am J Cardiol. 2013;112:1461–1467. [PubMed:  23993125]  7. Guarguagli S, Kempny A, Cazzoli I, et al. Efficacy of catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation in  patients with congenital heart disease. Europace. 2019;21:1334–1344. [PubMed: 31168581]  8. Philip F, Muhammad KI, Agarwal S, et al. Pulmonary vein isolation for the treatment of drugrefractory atrial fibrillation in adults with congenital heart disease. Congenit Heart Dis. 2012;7:392– 399. [PubMed: 22469422]  9. Refaat MM, Ballout J, Mansour M. Ablation of atrial fibrillation in patients with congenital heart  disease. Arrhythm Electrophysiol Rev. 2017;6:191–194. [PubMed: 29326834]  10. Khairy P, Aboulhosn J, Broberg CS, et al. Thromboprophylaxis for atrial arrhythmias in congenital  heart disease: a multicenter study. Int J Cardiol. 2016;223:729–735. [PubMed: 27573597]  11. Labombarda F, Hamilton R, Shohoudi A, et al. Increasing prevalence of atrial fibrillation and  permanent atrial arrhythmias in congenital heart disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;70:857–865.  [PubMed: 28797355]  12. Stout KK, Daniels CJ, Aboulhosn JA, et al. 2018 AHA/ACC guideline for the management of  adults with congenital heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American  Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2019;139:e698–e800.  [PubMed: 30586767]  13. Sohns C, Nurnberg JH, Hebe J, et al. Catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation in adults with  congenital heart disease: lessons learned from more than 10 years following a sequential ablation  approach. JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2018;4:733–743. [PubMed: 29929666]  14. Khairy P, Van Hare GF, Balaji S, et al. PACES/HRS expert consensus statement on the recognition  and management of arrhythmias in adult congenital heart disease Developed in partnership  between the Pediatric and Congenital Electrophysiology Society (PACES) and the Heart Rhythm  Society (HRS). Heart Rhythm. 2014;11:e102–e165. [PubMed: 24814377]  15. Fish FA, Gillette PC, Benson DW Jr Proarrhythmia, cardiac arrest and death in young patients  receiving encainide and flecainide The Pediatric Electrophysiology Group. J Am Coll Cardiol.  1991;18:356–365. [PubMed: 1906902]  16. Epstein AE, Hallstrom AP, Rogers WJ, et al. Mortality following ventricular arrhythmia  suppression by encainide, flecainide, and moricizine after myocardial infarction The original  design concept of the Cardiac Arrhythmia Suppression Trial (CAST). JAMA. 1993;270:2451– 2455. [PubMed: 8230622]  17. Thorne SA, Barnes I, Cullinan P, et al. Amiodarone-associated thyroid dysfunction: risk factors in  adults with congenital heart disease. Circulation. 1999;100:149–154. [PubMed: 10402444]  18. Stan MN, Ammash NM, Warnes CA, et al. Body mass index and the development of amiodaroneinduced thyrotoxicosis in adults with congenital heart disease--a cohort study. Int J Cardiol.  2013;167:821–826. [PubMed: 22386642]  19. El-Assaad I, Al-Kindi SG, Abraham J, et al. Use of dofetilide in adult patients with  atrial arrhythmias and congenital heart disease: a PACES collaborative study. Heart Rhythm.  2016;13:2034–2039. [PubMed: 27435587]  20. Connolly SJ, Camm AJ, Halperin JL, et al. Dronedarone in high-risk permanent atrial fibrillation.  N Engl J Med. 2011;365:2268–2276. [PubMed: 22082198]  21. Kober L, Torp-Pedersen C, McMurray JJ, et al. Increased mortality after dronedarone therapy for  severe heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:2678–2687. [PubMed: 18565860]  22. Kottmaier M, Baur A, Lund S, et al. Atrial fibrillation ablation in adults with congenital  heart disease on uninterrupted oral anticoagulation is safe and efficient. Clin Res Cardiol.  2020;109:904–910. [PubMed: 31894385]  et al. Page 225 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

23. Abadir S, Waldmann V , Dyrda K, et al. Feasibility and safety of cryoballoon ablation for atrial  fibrillation in patients with congenital heart disease. World J Cardiol. 2019;11:149–158. [PubMed:  31171960]  24. Bessiere F, Mondesert B, Chaix MA, et al. Arrhythmias in adults with congenital heart disease and  heart failure. Heart Rhythm O2. 2021;2:744–753. [PubMed: 34988526]  25. Karsenty C, Zhao A, Marijon E, et al. Risk of thromboembolic complications in adult congenital  heart disease: a literature review. Arch Cardiovasc Dis. 2018;111:613–620. [PubMed: 29859704]  26. Yang H, Bouma BJ, Dimopoulos K, et al. Non-vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulants (NOACs)  for thromboembolic prevention, are they safe in congenital heart disease? Results of a worldwide  study. Int J Cardiol. 2020;299:123–130. [PubMed: 31307847]  10.9.1. Prevention of AF After Cardiac Surgery 1. Filardo G, da Graca B, Sass DM, et al. Preoperative β-blockers as a coronary surgery quality metric:  the lack of evidence of efficacy. Ann Thorac Surg. 2020;109:1150–1158. [PubMed: 31513778]  2. Gillinov AM, Bagiella E, Moskowitz AJ, et al. Rate control versus rhythm control for atrial  fibrillation after cardiac surgery. N Engl J Med. 2016;374:1911–1921. [PubMed: 27043047]  3. Mehaffey JH, Hawkins RB, Byler M, et al. Amiodarone protocol provides cost-effective reduction in  postoperative atrial fibrillation. Ann Thorac Surg. 2018;105:1697–1702. [PubMed: 29374511]  4. Guarnieri T Intravenous antiarrhythmic regimens with focus on amiodarone for prophylaxis of atrial  fibrillation after open heart surgery. Am J Cardiol. 1999;84:152r–155r. [PubMed: 10426331]  5. Mitchell LB, Exner DV , Wyse DG, et al. Prophylactic oral amiodarone for the prevention of  arrhythmias that begin early after revascularization, valve replacement, or repair: PAPABEAR: a  randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2005;294:3093–3100. [PubMed: 16380589]  6. Arsenault KA, Yusuf AM, Crystal E, et al. Interventions for preventing postoperative  atrial fibrillation in patients undergoing heart surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.  2013;2013:Cd003611. [PubMed: 23440790]  7. Gaudino M, Sanna T, Ballman KV , et al. Posterior left pericardiotomy for the prevention of atrial  fibrillation after cardiac surgery: an adaptive, singlecentre, single-blind, randomised, controlled trial.  Lancet. 2021;398:2075–2083. [PubMed: 34788640]  8. Eikelboom R, Sanjanwala R, Le ML, et al. Postoperative atrial fibrillation after cardiac surgery: a  systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Thorac Surg. 2021;111:544–554. [PubMed: 32687821]  9. Imazio M, Brucato A, Ferrazzi P, et al. Colchicine reduces postoperative atrial fibrillation: results  of the Colchicine for the Prevention of the Postpericardiotomy Syndrome (COPPS) atrial fibrillation  substudy. Circulation. 2011;124:2290–2295. [PubMed: 22090167]  10. Imazio M, Brucato A, Ferrazzi P, et al. Colchicine for prevention of postpericardiotomy  syndrome and postoperative atrial fibrillation: the COPPS-2 randomized clinical trial. JAMA.  2014;312:1016–1023. [PubMed: 25172965]  11. Shvartz V , Le T, Kryukov Y , et al. Colchicine for prevention of atrial fibrillation after cardiac  surgery in the early postoperative period. J Clin Med. 2022;11:1387. [PubMed: 35268478]  10.9.2. Treatment of AF After Cardiac Surgery 1. Filardo G, da Graca B, Sass DM, et al. Preoperative β-blockers as a coronary surgery quality metric:  the lack of evidence of efficacy. Ann Thorac Surg. 2020;109:1150–1158. [PubMed: 31513778]  2. Arsenault KA, Yusuf AM, Crystal E, et al. Interventions for preventing postoperative  atrial fibrillation in patients undergoing heart surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.  2013;2013:Cd003611. [PubMed: 23440790]  3. Brinkman W, Herbert MA, O'Brien S, et al. Preoperative beta-blocker use in coronary artery bypass  grafting surgery: national database analysis. JAMA Intern Med. 2014;174:1320–1327. [PubMed:  24934977]  4. Kohsaka S, Miyata H, Motomura N, et al. Effects of preoperative beta-blocker use on clinical  outcomes after coronary artery bypass grafting: a report from the Japanese Cardiovascular Surgery  Database. Anesthesiology. 2016;124:45–55. [PubMed: 26517856]  et al. Page 226 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

5. Gillinov AM, Bagiella E, Moskowitz AJ, et al. Rate control versus rhythm control for atrial  fibrillation after cardiac surgery. N Engl J Med. 2016;374:1911–1921. [PubMed: 27043047]  6. Rezk M, Taha A, Nielsen SJ, et al. Clinical course of postoperative atrial fibrillation after cardiac  surgery and long-term outcome. Ann Thorac Surg. 2022;114:2209–2215. [PubMed: 35430224]  7. Fragao-Marques M, Teixeira F, Mancio J, et al. Impact of oral anticoagulation therapy on  postoperative atrial fibrillation outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Thromb J.  2021;19:89. [PubMed: 34798896]  8. Imazio M, Brucato A, Ferrazzi P, et al. Colchicine reduces postoperative atrial fibrillation: results  of the Colchicine for the Prevention of the Postpericardiotomy Syndrome (COPPS) atrial fibrillation  substudy. Circulation. 2011;124:2290–2295. [PubMed: 22090167]  9. Imazio M, Brucato A, Ferrazzi P, et al. Colchicine for prevention of postpericardiotomy syndrome  and postoperative atrial fibrillation: the COPPS-2 randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2014;312:1016– 1023. [PubMed: 25172965]  10. Shvartz V , Le T, Kryukov Y , et al. Colchicine for prevention of atrial fibrillation after cardiac  surgery in the early postoperative period. J Clin Med. 2022;11:1387. [PubMed: 35268478]  10.10. Acute Medical Illness or Surgery (Including AF in Critical Care) 1. McIntyre WF, Um KJ, Cheung CC, et al. Atrial fibrillation detected initially during acute medical  illness: a systematic review. Eur Heart J. 2019;8:130–141. 2. Lubitz SA, Yin X, Rienstra M, et al. Long-term outcomes of secondary atrial fibrillation in the  community: the Framingham Heart Study. Circulation. 2015;131:1648–1655. [PubMed: 25769640]  3. Wang EY , Hulme OL, Khurshid S, et al. Initial precipitants and recurrence of atrial fibrillation. Circ  Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2020;13:e007716. [PubMed: 32078361]  4. Abdelmoneim SS, Rosenberg E, Meykler M, et al. The incidence and natural progression of  new-onset postoperative atrial fibrillation. JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2021;7:1134–1144. [PubMed:  33933413]  5. Charitos EI, Herrmann FEM, Ziegler PD. Atrial fibrillation recurrence and spontaneous conversion  to sinus rhythm after cardiac surgery: insights from 426 patients with continuous rhythm  monitoring. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2021;32:2171–2178. [PubMed: 34164884]  6. El-Chami MF, Merchant FM, Smith P, et al. Management of new-onset postoperative  atrial fibrillation utilizing insertable cardiac monitor technology to observe recurrence of AF  (MONITOR-AF). Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2016;39:1083–1089. [PubMed: 27570120]  7. Perino AC, Fan J, Schmitt SK, et al. Treating specialty and outcomes in newly diagnosed atrial  fibrillation: from the TREAT-AF study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;70:78–86. [PubMed: 28662810]  8. Sanna T, Diener HC, Passman RS, et al. Cryptogenic stroke and atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med.  2014;371:1261. 9. Ha ACT, Verma S, Mazer CD, et al. Effect of continuous electrocardiogram monitoring on detection  of undiagnosed atrial fibrillation after hospitalization for cardiac surgery: a randomized clinical trial.  JAMA Netw Open. 2021;4:e2121867. [PubMed: 34448866]  10. Walkey AJ, Quinn EK, Winter MR, et al. Practice patterns and outcomes associated with use of  anticoagulation among patients with atrial fibrillation during sepsis. JAMA Cardiol. 2016;1:682– 690. [PubMed: 27487456]  11. Quon MJ, Behlouli H, Pilote L. Anticoagulant use and risk of ischemic stroke and bleeding  in patients with secondary atrial fibrillation associated with acute coronary syndromes, acute  pulmonary disease, or sepsis. JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2018;4:386–393. [PubMed: 30089566]  12. Massera D, Wang D, V orchheimer DA, et al. Increased risk of stroke and mortality following newonset atrial fibrillation during hospitalization. Europace. 2017;19:929–936. [PubMed: 27207814]  13. Klein Klouwenberg PM, Frencken JF, Kuipers S, et al. Incidence, predictors, and outcomes of  new-onset atrial fibrillation in critically ill patients with sepsis a cohort study. Am J Respir Crit  Care Med. 2017;195:205–211. [PubMed: 27467907]  14. Kuipers S, Klein Klouwenberg PM, Cremer OL. Incidence, risk factors and outcomes of new-onset  atrial fibrillation in patients with sepsis: a systematic review. Crit Care. 2014;18:688. [PubMed:  25498795]  et al. Page 227 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

15. Walkey AJ, Wiener RS, Ghobrial JM, et al. Incident stroke and mortality associated with newonset atrial fibrillation in patients hospitalized with severe sepsis. JAMA. 2011;306:2248–2254.  [PubMed: 22081378]  16. McIntyre WF, Vadakken ME, Rai AS, et al. Incidence and recurrence of new-onset atrial  fibrillation detected during hospitalization for noncardiac surgery: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Can J Anaesth. 2021;68:1045–1056. [PubMed: 33624255]  17. Chyou JY , Barkoudah E, Dukes JW, et al. Atrial Fibrillation occurring during acute hospitalization:  a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2023;147:e676–e698.  [PubMed: 36912134]  10.11. Hyperthyroidism 1. Gundlund A, Kumler T, Bonde AN, et al. Comparative thromboembolic risk in atrial  fibrillation with and without a secondary precipitant-Danish nationwide cohort study. BMJ Open.  2019;9:e028468. 2. Tng EL, Tiong YS, Aung AT, et al. Efficacy and safety of anticoagulation in thyrotoxic atrial  fibrillation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Endocr Connect. 2022;11:e220166. [PubMed:  35521808]  3. Jabbar A, Pingitore A, Pearce SH, et al. Thyroid hormones and cardiovascular disease. Nat Rev  Cardiol. 2017;14:39–55. [PubMed: 27811932]  4. Hollowell JG, Staehling NW, Flanders WD, et al. Serum TSH, T(4), and thyroid antibodies in  the United States population (1988 to 1994): National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey  (NHANES III). J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002;87:489–499. [PubMed: 11836274]  5. Frost L, Vestergaard P, Mosekilde L. Hyperthyroidism and risk of atrial fibrillation or flutter: a  population-based study. Arch Intern Med. 2004;164:1675–1678. [PubMed: 15302638]  6. Nakazawa HK, Sakurai K, Hamada N, et al. Management of atrial fibrillation in the post-thyrotoxic  state. Am J Med. 1982;72:903–906. [PubMed: 7091161]  7. Shimizu T, Koide S, Noh JY , et al. Hyperthyroidism and the management of atrial fibrillation.  Thyroid. 2002;12:489–493. [PubMed: 12165111]  8. Klein I, Ojamaa K. Thyroid hormone and the cardiovascular system. N Engl J Med. 2001;344:501– 509. [PubMed: 11172193]  9. Tagami T, Yambe Y , Tanaka T, et al. Short-term effects of beta-adrenergic antagonists and  methimazole in new-onset thyrotoxicosis caused by Graves' disease. Intern Med. 2012;51:2285– 2290. [PubMed: 22975536]  10. Nilsson OR, Karlberg BE, Kagedal B, et al. Non-selective and selective beta1-adrenoceptor  blocking agents in the treatment of hyperthyroidism. Acta Med Scand. 1979;206:21–25. [PubMed:  484256]  11. McDevitt DG, Nelson JK. Comparative trial of atenolol and propranolol in hyperthyroidism. Br J  Clin Pharmacol. 1978;6:233–237. [PubMed: 356867]  12. Jansson S, Lie-Karlsen K, Stenqvist O, et al. Oxygen consumption in patients with  hyperthyroidism before and after treatment with beta-blockade versus thyrostatic treatment: a  prospective randomized study. Ann Surg. 2001;233:60–64. [PubMed: 11141226]  13. Feely J, Peden N. Use of beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs in hyperthyroidism. Drugs.  1984;27:425–446. [PubMed: 6144501]  14. Goldstein SA, Green J, Huber K, et al. Characteristics and outcomes of atrial fibrillation in patients  with thyroid disease (from the ARISTOTLE trial). Am J Cardiol. 2019;124:1406–1412. [PubMed:  31474328]  15. Ari H, Gürdogan M, Erdogan E, et al. Short-term outcome of early electrical cardioversion for  atrial fibrillation in hyperthyroid versus euthyroid patients. Cardiol J. 2012;19:53–60. [PubMed:  22298168]  16. Razvi S, Jabbar A, Pingitore A, et al. Thyroid hormones and cardiovascular function and diseases.  J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018;71:1781–1796. [PubMed: 29673469]  17. Bruere H, Fauchier L, Bernard Brunet A, et al. History of thyroid disorders in relation to clinical  outcomes in atrial fibrillation. Am J Med. 2015;128:30–37. [PubMed: 25058863]  et al. Page 228 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

10.12. Pulmonary Disease 1. Du Q, Sun Y , Ding N, et al. Beta-blockers reduced the risk of mortality and exacerbation in patients  with COPD: a meta-analysis of observational studies. PLoS One. 2014;9:e113048. [PubMed:  25427000]  2. Salpeter S, Ormiston T, Salpeter E. Cardioselective beta-blockers for chronic obstructive pulmonary  disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005;4:CD003566. 3. Dransfield MT, V oelker H, Bhatt SP, et al. Metoprolol for the prevention of acute exacerbations of  COPD. N Engl J Med. 2019;381:2304–2314. [PubMed: 31633896]  4. Tongers J, Schwerdtfeger B, Klein G, et al. Incidence and clinical relevance of supraventricular  tachyarrhythmias in pulmonary hypertension. Am Heart J. 2007;153:127–132. [PubMed: 17174650]  5. Showkathali R, Tayebjee MH, Grapsa J, et al. Right atrial flutter isthmus ablation is feasible and  results in acute clinical improvement in patients with persistent atrial flutter and severe pulmonary  arterial hypertension. Int J Cardiol. 2011;149:279–280. [PubMed: 21420184]  6. Ruiz-Cano MJ, Gonzalez-Mansilla A, Escribano P, et al. Clinical implications of supraventricular  arrhythmias in patients with severe pulmonary arterial hypertension. Int J Cardiol. 2011;146:105– 106. [PubMed: 21056484]  7. Bradfield J, Shapiro S, Finch W, et al. Catheter ablation of typical atrial flutter in severe pulmonary  hypertension. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2012;23:1185–1190. [PubMed: 22734591]  8. Olsson KM, Nickel NP, Tongers J, et al. Atrial flutter and fibrillation in patients with pulmonary  hypertension. Int J Cardiol. 2013;167:2300–2305. [PubMed: 22727973]  9. Wen L, Sun ML, An P, et al. Frequency of supraventricular arrhythmias in patients with idiopathic  pulmonary arterial hypertension. Am J Cardiol. 2014;114:1420–1425. [PubMed: 25217453]  10. Cannillo M, Grosso Marra W, Gili S, et al. Supraventricular arrhythmias in patients with  pulmonary arterial hypertension. Am J Cardiol. 2015;116:1883–1889. [PubMed: 26522342]  11. Smith B, Genuardi MV , Koczo A, et al. Atrial arrhythmias are associated with increased mortality  in pulmonary arterial hypertension. Pulm Circ. 2018;8:2045894018790316. [PubMed: 29969045]  12. Kamada H, Kaneyama J, Inoue YY , et al. Long term prognosis in patients with  pulmonary hypertension undergoing catheter ablation for supraventricular tachycardia. Sci Rep.  2021;11:16176. [PubMed: 34376719]  13. Ye J, Yao P, Shi X, et al. A systematic literature review and meta-analysis on the impact of COPD  on atrial fibrillation patient outcome. Heart Lung. 2022;51:67–74. [PubMed: 34740082]  14. Bikdeli B, Abou Ziki MD, Lip GYH. Pulmonary embolism and atrial fibrillation: two sides of the  same coin? A systematic review. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2017;43:849–863. [PubMed: 28196379]  15. Noubiap JJ, Nyaga UF, Middeldorp ME, et al. Frequency and prognostic significance of atrial  fibrillation in acute pulmonary embolism: a pooled analysis. Respir Med. 2022;199:106862.  [PubMed: 35636098]  16. Proietti M, Laroche C, Drozd M, et al. Impact of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease  on prognosis in atrial fibrillation: a report from the EURObservational Research Programme  Pilot Survey on Atrial Fibrillation (EORP-AF) General Registry. Am Heart J. 2016;181:83–91.  [PubMed: 27823697]  17. Baker JG, Wilcox RG. Beta-lockers, heart disease and COPD: current controversies and  uncertainties. Thorax. 2017;72:271–276. [PubMed: 27927840]  18. Sivak JA, Raina A, Forfia PR. Assessment of the physiologic contribution of right atrial function to  total right heart function in patients with and without pulmonary arterial hypertension. Pulm Circ.  2016;6:322–328. [PubMed: 27683609]  10.13. Pregnancy 1. Georgiopoulos G, Tsiachris D, Kordalis A, et al. Pharmacotherapeutic strategies for atrial fibrillation  in pregnancy. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2019;20:1625–1636. [PubMed: 31136204]  2. Tamirisa KP, Elkayam U, Briller JE, et al. Arrhythmias in pregnancy. JACC Clin Electrophysiol.  2022;8:120–135. [PubMed: 35057977]  et al. Page 229 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

3. van Hagen IM, Roos-Hesselink JW, Ruys TP, et al. Pregnancy in women with a mechanical heart  valve: data of the European Society of Cardiology Registry of Pregnancy and Cardiac Disease  (ROPAC). Circulation. 2015;132:132–142. [PubMed: 26100109]  4. Vaidya VR, Arora S, Patel N, et al. Burden of arrhythmia in pregnancy. Circulation. 2017;135:619– 621. [PubMed: 28154000]  5. Salam AM, Ertekin E, van Hagen IM, et al. Atrial fibrillation or flutter during pregnancy in patients  with structural heart disease: data from the ROPAC (Registry on Pregnancy and Cardiac Disease).  JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2015;1:284–292. [PubMed: 29759316]  6. Lee MS, Chen W, Zhang Z, et al. Atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter in pregnant women-a  population-based study. J Am Heart Assoc. 2016;5:e003182. [PubMed: 27076563]  7. Scantlebury DC, Kattah AG, Weissgerber TL, et al. Impact of a history of hypertension in pregnancy  on later diagnosis of atrial fibrillation. J Am Heart Assoc. 2018;7:e007584. [PubMed: 29755033]  8. Body C, Christie JA. Gastrointestinal diseases in pregnancy: nausea, vomiting, hyperemesis  gravidarum, gastroesophageal reflux disease, constipation, and diarrhea. Gastroenterol Clin North  Am. 2016;45:267–283. [PubMed: 27261898]  9. Hindricks G, Potpara T, Dagres N, et al. 2020 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and management of  atrial fibrillation Developed in collaboration with the European Association for Cardio-Thoracic  Surgery (EACTS): the Task Force for the diagnosis and management of atrial fibrillation of  the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) Developed with the special contribution of the  European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA) of the ESC. Eur Heart J. 2021;42:373–498. [PubMed:  32860505]  10. Halpern DG, Weinberg CR, Pinnelas R, et al. Use of medication for cardiovascular disease  during pregnancy: JACC state-of-the-art review. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;73:457–476. [PubMed:  30704579]  11. Enriquez AD, Economy KE, Tedrow UB. Contemporary management of arrhythmias during  pregnancy. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2014;7:961–967. [PubMed: 25336366]  12. Regitz-Zagrosek V , Roos-Hesselink JW, Bauersachs J, et al. 2018 ESC guidelines for the  management of cardiovascular diseases during pregnancy. Eur Heart J. 2018;39:3165–3241.  [PubMed: 30165544]  13. Yalaz M, Levent E, Olukman M, et al. Role of digoxin-like immunoreactive substance in the  pathogenesis of transient tachypnea of newborn. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:704763. [PubMed:  23936837]  14. Anugu VR, Nalluri N, Asti D, et al. New-onset lone atrial fibrillation in pregnancy. Ther Adv  Cardiovasc Dis. 2016;10:274–276. [PubMed: 27099243]  15. Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al. 2020 ACC/AHA guideline for the management of  patients with valvular heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American  Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2021;143:e72– e227. [PubMed: 33332150]  16. Hoeltzenbein M, Beck E, Meixner K, et al. Pregnancy outcome after exposure to the novel oral  anticoagulant rivaroxaban in women at suspected risk for thromboembolic events: a case series  from the German Embryotox Pharmacovigilance Centre. Clin Res Cardiol. 2016;105:117–126.  [PubMed: 26195125]  10.14. Cardio-Oncology and Anticoagulation Considerations 1. Beavers CJ, Rodgers JE, Bagnola AJ, et al. Cardio-oncology drug interactions: a scientific statement  from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2022;145:e811–e838. [PubMed: 35249373]  2. van Leeuwen RWF, Jansman FGA, van den Bemt P, et al. Drug-drug interactions in patients treated  for cancer: a prospective study on clinical interventions. Ann Oncol. 2015;26:992–997. [PubMed:  25628444]  3. Kim PY , Irizarry-Caro JA, Ramesh T, et al. How to diagnose and manage QT prolongation in cancer  patients. JACC CardioOncol. 2021;3:145–149. [PubMed: 34396315]  4. Ye JZ, Hansen FB, Mills RW, et al. Oncotherapeutic protein kinase inhibitors associated with  pro-arrhythmic liability. JACC CardioOncol. 2021;3:88–97. [PubMed: 34396309]  et al. Page 230 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

5. O'Neal WT, Lakoski SG, Qureshi W, et al. Relation between cancer and atrial fibrillation (from the  REasons for Geographic And Racial Differences in Stroke Study). Am J Cardiol. 2015;115:1090– 1094. [PubMed: 25711434]  6. Jain P, Zhao S, Lee HJ, et al. Ibrutinib With rituximab in first-line treatment of older patients with  mantle cell lymphoma. J Clin Oncol. 2022;40:202–212. [PubMed: 34797699]  7. Atterman A, Friberg L, Asplund K, et al. Net benefit of oral anticoagulants in patients with  atrial fibrillation and active cancer: a nationwide cohort study. Europace. 2020;22:58–65. [PubMed:  31750897]  8. Mariani MV , Magnocavallo M, Straito M, et al. Direct oral anticoagulants versus vitamin K  antagonists in patients with atrial fibrillation and cancer a meta-analysis. J Thromb Thrombolysis.  2021;51:419–429. [PubMed: 33044735]  9. Jakobsen CB, Lamberts M, Carlson N, et al. Incidence of atrial fibrillation in different major cancer  subtypes: a nationwide population-based 12 year follow up study. BMC Cancer. 2019;19:1105.  [PubMed: 31726997]  10. Yuan M, Zhang Z, Tse G, et al. Association of cancer and the risk of developing atrial  fibrillation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Cardiol Res Pract. 2019;2019:8985273.  [PubMed: 31110819]  11. Farmakis D, Parissis J, Filippatos G. Insights into onco-cardiology: atrial fibrillation in cancer. J  Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63:945–953. [PubMed: 24361314]  12. Schizas D, Kosmopoulos M, Giannopoulos S, et al. Meta-analysis of risk factors and complications  associated with atrial fibrillation after oesophagectomy. Br J Surg. 2019;106:534–547. [PubMed:  30908612]  13. Hu YF, Liu CJ, Chang PM, et al. Incident thromboembolism and heart failure associated with newonset atrial fibrillation in cancer patients. Int J Cardiol. 2013;165:355–357. [PubMed: 22989607]  14. Murtaza M, Baig MMA, Ahmed J, et al. Higher mortality associated with new-onset atrial  fibrillation in cancer patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Front Cardiovasc Med.  2022;9:867002. [PubMed: 35498001]  15. Guha A, Fradley MG, Dent SF, et al. Incidence, risk factors, and mortality of atrial fibrillation in  breast cancer: a SEER-Medicare analysis. Eur Heart J. 2022;43:300–312. [PubMed: 34791123]  16. Xiao L, Salem JE, Clauss S, et al. Ibrutinib-mediated atrial fibrillation attributable to inhibition of  C-terminal Src kinase. Circulation. 2020;142:2443–2455. [PubMed: 33092403]  17. Caldeira D, Alves D, Costa J, et al. Ibrutinib increases the risk of hypertension and atrial  fibrillation: systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2019;14:e0211228. [PubMed:  30785921]  18. Melloni C, Shrader P, Carver J, et al. Management and outcomes of patients with atrial  fibrillation and a history of cancer: the ORBIT-AF registry. Eur Heart J Qual Care Clin Outcomes.  2017;3:192–197. [PubMed: 28838088]  19. Peixoto de Miranda EJF, Takahashi T, Iwamoto F, et al. Drug-drug interactions of 257  antineoplastic and supportive care agents with 7 anticoagulants: a comprehensive review of  interactions and mechanisms. Clin Appl Thromb Hemost. 2020;26:1076029620936325. [PubMed:  32862668]  20. Higuchi S, Kabeya Y , Matsushita K, et al. Incidence and complications of perioperative atrial  fibrillation after non-cardiac surgery for malignancy. PLoS One. 2019;14:e0216239. [PubMed:  31063466]  21. Al-Kindi SG, Oliveira GH. Prevalence of preexisting cardiovascular disease in patients with  different types of cancer: the unmet need for onco-cardiology. Mayo Clin Proc. 2016;91:81–83.  [PubMed: 26602599]  22. Chung MK, Eckhardt LL, Chen LY , et al. Lifestyle and risk factor modification for reduction  of atrial fibrillation: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation.  2020;141:e750–e772. [PubMed: 32148086]  23. Rienstra M, Hobbelt AH, Alings M, et al. Targeted therapy of underlying conditions improves  sinus rhythm maintenance in patients with persistent atrial fibrillation: results of the RACE 3 trial.  Eur Heart J. 2018;39:2987–2996. [PubMed: 29401239]  et al. Page 231 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

24. Verdecchia P, Staessen JA, Angeli F, et al. Usual versus tight control of systolic blood pressure  in non-diabetic patients with hypertension (Cardio-Sis): an open-label randomised trial. Lancet.  2009;374:525–533. [PubMed: 19683638]  25. Rao MP, Halvorsen S, Wojdyla D, et al. Blood pressure control and risk of stroke or systemic  embolism in patients with atrial fibrillation: results from the Apixaban for Reduction in Stroke  and Other Thromboembolic Events in Atrial Fibrillation (ARISTOTLE) Trial. J Am Heart Assoc.  2015;4:e002015. [PubMed: 26627878]  26. Toufektzian L, Zisis C, Balaka C, et al. Effectiveness of brain natriuretic peptide in predicting  postoperative atrial fibrillation in patients undergoing non-cardiac thoracic surgery. Interact  Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2015;20:654–657. [PubMed: 25630332]  27. Amar D, Zhang H, Tan KS, et al. A brain natriuretic peptide-based prediction model for atrial  fibrillation after thoracic surgery: development and internal validation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg.  2019;157:2493–2499 e2491. [PubMed: 30826103]  28. Chang EK, Chanson D, Teh JB, et al. Atrial fibrillation in patients undergoing allogeneic  hematopoietic cell transplantation. J Clin Oncol. 2021;39:902–910. [PubMed: 33417479]  29. Hemu M, Zimmerman A, Kalra D, et al. Pretransplant cardiac evaluation using novel technology. J  Clin Med. 2019;8:690. [PubMed: 31100854]  30. Ganatra S, Sharma A, Shah S, et al. Ibrutinib-associated atrial fibrillation. JACC Clin  Electrophysiol. 2018;4:1491–1500. [PubMed: 30573111]  31. Abushukair H, Syaj S, Ababneh O, et al. First- versus second-generation Bruton tyrosine kinase  inhibitors in Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J  Hematol. 2022;97:942–950. [PubMed: 35358350]  32. Buza V , Rajagopalan B, Curtis AB. Cancer treatment-induced arrhythmias: focus on chemotherapy  and targeted therapies. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2017;10:e005443. [PubMed: 28798022]  33. Fradley MG, Beckie TM, Brown SA, et al. Recognition, prevention, and management of  arrhythmias and autonomic disorders in cardio-oncology: a scientific statement from the American  Heart Association. Circulation. 2021;144:e41–e55. [PubMed: 34134525]  10.15. CKD and Kidney Failure 1. Alonso A, Lopez FL, Matsushita K, et al. Chronic kidney disease is associated with the  incidence of atrial fibrillation: the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study. Circulation.  2011;123:2946–2953. [PubMed: 21646496]  2. Watanabe H, Watanabe T, Sasaki S, et al. Close bidirectional relationship between chronic kidney  disease and atrial fibrillation: the Niigata preventive medicine study. Am Heart J. 2009;158:629– 636. [PubMed: 19781424]  3. Bansal N, Fan D, Hsu CY , et al. Incident atrial fibrillation and risk of end-stage renal disease in  adults with chronic kidney disease. Circulation. 2013;127:569–574. [PubMed: 23275377]  10.16. Anticoagulation Use in Patients With Liver Disease 1. Qamar A, Antman EM, Ruff CT, et al. Edoxaban versus warfarin in patients with atrial fibrillation  and history of liver disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;74:179–189. [PubMed: 31296289]  2. Serper M, Weinberg EM, Cohen JB, et al. Mortality and hepatic decompensation in patients  with cirrhosis and atrial fibrillation treated with anticoagulation. Hepatology. 2021;73:219–232.  [PubMed: 32267547]  3. Proietti M, Marzona I, Vannini T, et al. Impact of liver disease on oral anticoagulant prescription  and major adverse events in patients with atrial fibrillation: analysis from a population-based cohort  study. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Pharmacother. 2021;7:f84–f92. [PubMed: 32129845]  4. Pastori D, Lip GYH, Farcomeni A, et al. Incidence of bleeding in patients with atrial fibrillation  and advanced liver fibrosis on treatment with vitamin K or non-vitamin K antagonist oral  anticoagulants. Int J Cardiol. 2018;264:58–63. [PubMed: 29776574]  5. Pastori D, Sciacqua A, Marcucci R, et al. Prevalence and impact of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease  in atrial fibrillation. Mayo Clin Proc. 2020;95:513–520. [PubMed: 31753536]  et al. Page 232 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

6. Kuo L, Chao TF, Liu CJ, et al. Liver cirrhosis in patients with atrial fibrillation: would  oral anticoagulation have a net clinical benefit for stroke prevention? J Am Heart Assoc.  2017;6:e005307. [PubMed: 28645935]  7. Chen S, Purerfellner H, Meyer C, et al. Anticoagulation in atrial fibrillation and liver disease:  a pooled-analysis of >20 000 patients. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Pharmacother. 2022;8:336–345.  [PubMed: 33871577]  8. Lee SR, Lee HJ, Choi EK, et al. Direct oral anticoagulants in patients with atrial fibrillation and  liver disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;73:3295–3308. [PubMed: 31248551]  9. Lee HF, Chan YH, Chang SH, et al. Effectiveness and safety of non-vitamin K antagonist oral  anticoagulant and warfarin in cirrhotic patients with non-valvular atrial fibrillation. J Am Heart  Assoc. 2019;8:e011112. [PubMed: 30834802]  10. Wang CL, Wu VC, Kuo CF, et al. Efficacy and safety of non-vitamin K antagonist oral  anticoagulants in atrial fibrillation patients with impaired liver function: a retrospective cohort  study. J Am Heart Assoc. 2018;7:e009263. [PubMed: 30371232]  11. Lee ZY , Suah BH, Teo YH, et al. Comparison of the efficacy and safety of direct oral  anticoagulants and vitamin k antagonists in patients with atrial fibrillation and concomitant liver  cirrhosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Cardiovasc Drugs. 2022;22:157–165.  [PubMed: 34008145]  12. Kubitza D, Roth A, Becka M, et al. Effect of hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics and  pharmacodynamics of a single dose of rivaroxaban, an oral, direct Factor Xa inhibitor. Br J Clin  Pharmacol. 2013;76:89–98. [PubMed: 23294275]  13. Menichelli D, Ronca V , Di Rocco A, et al. Direct oral anticoagulants and advanced liver disease: a  systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Clin Invest. 2021;51:e13397. [PubMed: 32895926]  14. Mendell J, Johnson L, Chen S. An open-label, phase 1 study to evaluate the effects of  hepatic impairment on edoxaban pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. J Clin Pharmacol.  2015;55:1395–1405. [PubMed: 26011596]  15. Frost CE, Ly V , Garonzik SM. Apixaban Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics in subjects  with mild or moderate hepatic impairment. Drugs R D. 2021;21:375–384. [PubMed: 34363188]  16. Stangier J, Stähle H, Rathgen K, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of dabigatran  etexilate, an oral direct thrombin inhibitor, with coadministration of digoxin. J Clin Pharmacol.  2012;52:243–250. [PubMed: 21868715]  et al. Page 233 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

TOP 10 TAKE-HOME MESSAGES 1. Stages of atrial fibrillation (AF): The previous classification of AF, which  was based only on arrhythmia duration, although useful, tended to emphasize  therapeutic interventions. The new proposed classification, using stages,  recognizes AF as a disease continuum that requires a variety of strategies  at the different stages, from prevention, lifestyle and risk factor modification,  screening, and therapy. 2. AF risk factor modification and prevention: This guideline recognizes  lifestyle and risk factor modification as a pillar of AF management to  prevent onset, progression, and adverse outcomes. The guideline emphasizes  risk factor management throughout the disease continuum and offers  more prescriptive recommendations, accordingly, including management of  obesity, weight loss, physical activity, smoking cessation, alcohol moderation,  hypertension, and other comorbidities. 3. Flexibility in using clinical risk scores and expanding beyond CHA2DS2V ASc for prediction of stroke and systemic embolism: Recommendations  for anticoagulation are now made based on yearly thromboembolic event  risk using a validated clinical risk score, such as CHA2DS2-V ASc. However,  patients at an intermediate annual risk score who remain uncertain about  the benefit of anticoagulation can benefit from consideration of other risk  variables to help inform the decision, or the use of other clinical risk scores to  improve prediction, facilitate shared decision making, and incorporate into the  electronic medical record. 4. Consideration of stroke risk modifiers: Patients with AF at intermediate to  low (<2%) annual risk of ischemic stroke can benefit from consideration of  factors that might modify their risk of stroke, such as the characteristics of  their AF (eg, burden), nonmodifiable risk factors (sex), and other dynamic or  modifiable factors (blood pressure control) that may inform shared decisionmaking discussions. 5. Early rhythm control: With the emergence of new and consistent evidence,  this guideline emphasizes the importance of early and continued management  of patients with AF that should focus on maintaining sinus rhythm and  minimizing AF burden. 6. Catheter ablation of AF receives a Class 1 indication as first-line therapy  in selected patients: Recent randomized studies have demonstrated the  superiority of catheter ablation over drug therapy for rhythm control in  appropriately selected patients. In view of the most recent evidence, we  upgraded the Class of Recommendation. 7. Catheter ablation of AF in appropriate patients with heart failure with  reduced ejection fraction receives a Class 1 indication: Recent randomized  studies have demonstrated the superiority of catheter ablation over drug  et al. Page 234 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

therapy for rhythm control in patients with heart failure and reduced ejection  failure. In view of the data, we upgraded the Class of Recommendation for  this population of patients. 8. Recommendations have been updated for device-detected AF: In view of  recent studies, more prescriptive recommendations are provided for patients  with device-detected AF that consider the interaction between episode  duration and the patienťs underlying risk for thromboembolism. This includes  considerations for patients with AF detected via implantable devices and  wearables. 9. Left atrial appendage occlusion devices receive higher level Class of  Recommendation: In view of additional data on safety and efficacy of left  atrial appendage occlusion devices, the Class of Recommendation has been  upgraded to 2a compared with the 2019 AF Focused Update for use of these  devices in patients with long-term contraindications to anticoagulation. 10. Recommendations are made for patients with AF identified during  medical illness or surgery (precipitants): Emphasis is made on the risk  of recurrent AF after AF is discovered during noncardiac illness or other  precipitants, such as surgery. et al. Page 235 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Future Research Needs 1. Verma A, Ha ACT, Kirchhof P, et al. The Optimal Anti-Coagulation  for Enhanced-Risk Patients Post-Catheter Ablation for Atrial Fibrillation  (OCEAN) trial. Am Heart J. 2018;197:124–132. 2. Schrickel JW, Linhart M, Bänsch D, et al. Rationale and design of the  ODIn-AF Trial: randomized evaluation of the prevention of silent cerebral  thromboembolism by oral anticoagulation with dabigatran after pulmonary  vein isolation for atrial fibrillation. Clin Res Cardiol. 2016;105:95–105. 3. Riley MP, Zado E, Hutchinson MD, et al. Risk of stroke or transient ischemic  attack after atrial fibrillation ablation with oral anticoagulant use guided  by ECG monitoring and pulse assessment. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol.  2014;25:591–596. 4. Passman R, Leong-Sit P, Andrei AC, et al. Targeted anticoagulation  for atrial fibrillation guided by continuous rhythm assessment with an  insertable cardiac monitor: the Rhythm Evaluation for Anticoagulation  With Continuous Monitoring (REACTCOM). Pilot Study. J Cardiovasc  Electrophysiol. 2016;27:264–270. et al. Page 236 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Temporal Trends in Counts and Age-Standardized Rates of AF-Prevalent Cases by  Social Demographic Index Quintile for Both Sexes Combined, 1990–2017. Trends in counts of AF-prevalent cases by SDI quintile, 1990–2017. SDI was made up of  the geometric mean of 3 common indicators: the lag distributed income per capita, mean  educational achievement for those aged ≥15 y, and total fertility rate <25 y. SDI ranged  from 0 to 1, where 0 represents the theoretical minimum level of development, whereas  1 represents the theoretical maximum level of development. Modified from Dai et al7 by  permission of Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology.  Copyright 2020 Oxford University Press. AF indicates atrial fibrillation; and SDI, Social  Demographic Index. et al. Page 237 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Prevalence of AF Among Medicare Beneficiaries, 1993–2007. (A) In the overall cohort, (B) by age group, (C) by sex, and (D) by race. The dashed lines in  panel A represent 95% CIs. Reproduced with permission from Piccini et al.8 Copyright 2012  American Heart Association, Inc. AF indicates atrial fibrillation. et al. Page 238 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 3. Age-Standardized Global Prevalence Rates of AF and Atrial Flutter per 100 000, Both  Sexes, 2020. During each annual GBD Study cycle, population health estimates are produced for the fulltime series. Improvements in statistical and geospatial modeling methods and the addition of  new data sources may lead to changes in past results across GBD Study cycles. Modified with permission from Tsao et al.2 Copyright 2023 American Heart Association,  Inc. Source: Institute for Health Metrics Evaluation. Used with permission. All rights  reserved. AF indicates atrial fibrillation; and GBD, Global Burden of Disease. et al. Page 239 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 4. AF Stages: Evolution of Atrial Arrhythmia Progression. *Heart failure, valve disease, coronary artery disease, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,  neuromuscular disorders, thyroid disease. Original figure created by the 2023 Atrial  Fibrillation Guideline Writing Committee. AF indicates atrial fibrillation. et al. Page 240 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 5. Pillars for AF Management. AF indicates atrial fibrillation. et al. Page 241 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 6. Types of Atrial Flutter and Macroreentrant Atrial Tachycardia. The typical, reverse typical, and the lower-loop flutter all have the low right atrial isthmus  incorporated in the flutter circuit. Other macroreentrant flutters include scar-mediated  reentrant tachycardia and left mitral isthmus flutter. Modified with permission from Wellens  et al.3 Copyright 2002 American Heart Association, Inc. Fl indicates flutter; LA, left atrium;  and MRT, macroreentrent. et al. Page 242 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 7. Mechanisms and Pathways Leading to AF. The pathways that contribute to the development of AF create a substrate for reentry and  provide triggers that can initiate arrhythmic activity. AF indicates atrial fibrillation; PAC,  premature atrial contraction; NLRP3, NOD-, LRR- and pyrin domain-containing protein 3;  and RAAS, renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. et al. Page 243 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 8. Contemporary Summary of the Role of the ANS in AF. Original figure created by the 2023 Atrial Fibrillation Guideline Writing Committee. AF  indicates atrial fibrillation; ANS, autonomic nervous system; HRV , heart rate variability; and  LA, left atrium. et al. Page 244 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 9. Rates of Stroke by Stroke Risk Score Levels in Different Cohorts. Overall stroke rate in atrial fibrillation cohorts in order of descending stroke rate (events  per 100 person-years). Reproduced with permission from Quinn et al.4 Copyright 2017  American Heart Association, Inc. et al. Page 245 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 10. Antithrombotic Options in Patients With AF. Colors correspond to Table 2. AF indicates atrial fibrillation; and DOAC, direct oral  anticoagulant. et al. Page 246 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 11. DOAC Laboratory Monitoring. *HAS-BLED scoring (low risk=score 0, moderate risk=score 1–2, high risk=score ≥3):  uncontrolled hypertension (systolic blood pressure >160 mm Hg)=1 point; abnormal renal  (serum creatinine >2.26 mg/dL, dialysis, or kidney transplant) or hepatic function (bilirubin  >2 times upper limit normal, alanine aminotransferase/aspartate aminotransferase/alkaline  phosphatase >3 times upper limit normal, or cirrhosis)=1 or 2 points; stroke (hemorrhagic  or ischemic)=1 point; bleeding history or predisposition=1 point; labile INR (time in  therapeutic range <60%)=1 point; elderly age ≥65 years=1 point; drugs (antiplatelet agents  or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) or excessive alcohol intake (8 units/week)=1 or 2  points. †Child-Pugh scoring: the severity of liver disease, primarily cirrhosis in patients with  documented liver disease. Child-Pugh A (mild): 5 to 6 points; Child-Pugh B (moderate): 7  to 9 points; Child-Pugh C (severe): 10 to 15 points. The score is based on the 5 variables:  encephalopathy (none=1 point, grade 1 and 2=2 points, grade 3 and 4=3 points); ascites  (none=1 point, slight=2 points, moderate=3 points); total bilirubin (<2 mg/mL=1 point,  2–3 mg/mL=2 points, >3 mg/mL=3 points); albumin (>3.5 mg/mL=1 point, 2.8–3.5 mg/ mL=2 points, <2.8 mg/mL=3 points); INR (<1.7=1 point, 1.7–2.2=2 points, >2.2=3 points).  Original figure created by the 2023 Atrial Fibrillation Guideline Writing Committee. CrCL  indicates creatinine clearance based on actual body weight; DOAC, direct oral anticoagulant;  and INR, international normalized ratio. et al. Page 247 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 12. Consideration of Oral Anticoagulation for Device-Detected AHREs According to  Patient Stroke Risk by CHA2DS2-V ASc Score and Episode Duration. A potential approach to patients with SCAF could consider both patient risk (as gauged by  the CHA2DS2-V ASc score) and SCAF burden/duration. Circle A indicates patients at low  risk or with short and infrequent AHREs do not require anticoagulation; Circle B, patients  with intermediate risk and AHREs lasting >6 min to 24 h are an uncertain population  but are currently under study in 2 prospective randomized controlled trials; and Circle  C, patients at high risk with longer episodes could be considered reasonable candidates  for anticoagulation, although the precise threshold for SCAF duration remains uncertain.  Reproduced with permission from Noseworthy et al.13 Copyright 2019 American Heart  Association, Inc. Modified from Freedman et al.14 Copyright 2017 Springer Nature Limited.  AF indicates atrial fibrillation; AHRE, atrial high-rate episode; ARTESiA, Apixaban for  the Reduction of Thrombo-Embolism in Patients With Device-Detected Subclinical Atrial  Fibrillation trial; COMMANDER HF, A Study to Assess the Effectiveness and Safety  of Rivaroxaban in Reducing the Risk of Death, Myocardial Infarction, or Stroke in  Participants With Heart Failure and Coronary Artery Disease Following an Episode of  Decompensated Heart Failure; COMPASS, Cardiovascular Outcomes for People Using  et al. Page 248 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Anticoagulation Strategies; ECG, electrocardiogram; NOAH, Non–Vitamin K Antagonist  Oral Anticoagulants in Patients With Atrial High Rate Episodes Trial; OAC, oral  anticoagulation; and SCAF, subclinical atrial fibrillation. Female sex is treated as a modifier  in the computation of the CHA2DS2-V ASc score. et al. Page 249 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 13. Active Bleeding Associated With Oral Anticoagulant. Colors correspond to Table 2. PCC indicates prothrombin complex concentrate. et al. Page 250 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 14. Forms of ICH, Classified by Mechanism. ICH indicates intracranial hemorrhage. et al. Page 251 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 15. Flowchart: Management of Periprocedural Anticoagulation in Patients With AF. Colors correspond to Table 2. AF indicates atrial fibrillation; CHA2DS2-V ASc, congestive  heart failure, hypertension, age ≥75 y (doubled), diabetes mellitus, prior stroke or transient  ischemic attack or thromboembolism (doubled), vascular disease, age 65 to 74 y, sex  category; DOAC, direct oral anticoagulant; ICD, implantable cardioverter-defibrillator; TE,  thromboembolism; and TIA, transient ischemic attack. et al. Page 252 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 16. Anticoagulation for Typical (CTI-Dependent) AFL *Intraprocedural documentation of bidirectional block. †For example, left atrial  enlargement, inducible AF, COPD, concomitant heart failure. Colors correspond to Table  2. AF indicates atrial fibrillation; AFL, atrial flutter; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary  disease; and CTI, cavotricuspid isthmus. et al. Page 253 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 17. Acute Rate Control in AF With RVR. *Contraindicated in patients with moderate-severe LV dysfunction regardless of  decompensated HF. Colors correspond to Table 2. AF indicates atrial fibrillation; A V ,  atrioventricular; HF, heart failure; LV , left ventricular; and RVR, rapid ventricular response. et al. Page 254 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 18. AF Long-Term Rate Control. Colors correspond to Table 2. AF indicates atrial fibrillation; LVEF, left ventricular ejection  fraction; and NDCC, nondihydropyridine calcium channel blocker. et al. Page 255 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 19. Patient and Clinical Considerations for Choosing Between Rhythm Control and Rate  Control. Patient and clinical considerations for deciding between rhythm- and rate-control strategies  in a patient with a high burden of AF. AF indicates atrial fibrillation; A V , atrioventricular;  LA, left atrium; and LV , left ventricular. et al. Page 256 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 20. Flowchart for Treatment Choices When Required to Decrease AF Burden. *Younger with few comorbidities. Colors correspond to Table 2. AF indicates atrial  fibrillation. et al. Page 257 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 21. Patients With Hemodynamically Stable AF Planned for Cardioversion. Colors correspond to Table 2. AC indicates anticoagulation; AF, atrial fibrillation; and  LAAO, left atrial appendage occlusion. et al. Page 258 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 22. Treatment Algorithm for Pharmacological Conversion of AF to Sinus Rhythm. *In the absence of preexcitation. †First dose administered in a facility that can provide  continuous electrocardiographic monitoring and cardiac resuscitation because of the  potential for proarrhythmia or postconversion bradycardia. ‡IV amiodarone requires several  hours for efficacy; ibutilide is generally effective in 30 to 90 min but carries a higher  risk of QT interval prolongation and torsades de pointes. §Recommend avoidance of IV  procainamide for patients initially treated with amiodarone or ibutilide to avoid excessive  QT interval prolongation and torsades de pointes. Rather, procainamide may be considered  for patients for whom amiodarone and ibutilide are not considered optimal as first-line  drugs. Colors correspond to Table 2. AF indicates atrial fibrillation; HFrEF, heart failure  with reduced ejection fraction; IV , intravenous; LV , left ventricular; LVEF, left ventricular  ejection fraction. et al. Page 259 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 23. Treatment Algorithm for Drug Therapy for Maintenance of Sinus Rhythm. In each box, drugs are listed in alphabetical order. Significant structural heart disease  with scar or fibrosis. Colors correspond to Table 2. HFrEF indicates heart failure with  reduced ejection fraction; HF, heart failure; IV , intravenous; LV , left ventricular; LVEF, left  ventricular ejection fraction; MI, myocardial infarction; and NYHA FC, New York Heart  Association functional class. et al. Page 260 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 24. Management of Patients With HF and AF. Colors correspond to Table 2. AF indicates atrial fibrillation; A V , atrioventricular; CMP,  cardiomyopathy; CMR, cardiac magnetic resonance; GDMT, guideline-directed medical  therapy; HF, heart failure; HFpEF, heart failure with preserved ejection fraction; HFrEF,  heart failure with reduced ejection fraction; IV , intravenous; LVEF, left ventricular ejection  fraction; NDCC, nondihydropyridine calcium channel blocker; and NYHA, New York Heart  Association. et al. Page 261 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 25. Prevention of AF After Cardiac Surgery. Colors correspond to Table 2. AF indicates atrial fibrillation; and CABG, coronary artery  bypass graft. et al. Page 262 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 26. Treatment of AF After Cardiac Surgery. Colors correspond to Table 2. AF indicates atrial fibrillation; and HR, heart rate. et al. Page 263 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 27. Unadjusted Cumulative Risk of AF Recurrence. Unadjusted curves displaying cumulative risk of recurrent AF, generated using KaplanMeier method. (A) Overall risk of recurrent AF among individuals with and without acute  precipitants. (B) Overall risk of recurrent AF among individuals with infection, cardiac  surgery, and noncardiothoracic surgery compared with no precipitant. These 3 precipitants  were selected for display because the risk of recurrent AF was significantly lower compared  with the referent group without precipitants in multivariable adjusted models. Individuals  with other AF precipitants were excluded from this plot for clarity. Reproduced with  permission from Wang et al.3 Copyright 2020 American Heart Association, Inc. AF  indicates atrial fibrillation; and CT, cardiothoracic. et al. Page 264 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 28. Acute Medical or Surgical Illness. Adapted with permission from Chyou et al. 17 Copyright 2023 American Heart Association,  Inc. AF indicates atrial fibrillation. et al. Page 265 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 266 Table 1. Associated ACC/AHA Guidelines Title Organization Publication Year  (Reference) Guidelines Atrial fibrillation AHA/ACC/HRS 20191* 20142 Atrial fibrillation ESC/EACTS/EHRA 20213 Atrial fibrillation CCS 20204 Management of adults with congenital heart disease AHA/ACC 20185 Diagnosis and treatment of patients with hypertrophic  cardiomyopathy AHA/ACC 20206 Management of patients with valvular heart disease ACC/AHA 20217 Coronary artery revascularization ACC/AHA/AATS/STS/SCAI 20218 Evaluation and diagnosis of chest pain AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/ SCMR 20219 Prevention of stroke in patients with stroke and transient ischemic  attack AHA/ASA 202110 Management of heart failure AHA/ACC/HFSA 202211 Management of arrhythmias in pregnancy HRS 202312 *The full-text AF guideline is from 2014.2 A focused update was published in 2019.1 AATS indicates American Association for Thoracic Surgery; ACC, American College of Cardiology; AF, atrial fibrillation; AHA, American Heart  Association; ASA, American Stroke Association; ASE, American Society of Echocardiography; CCS, Canadian Cardiovascular Society; CHEST,  American College of Chest Physicians; EACTS, European Association for Cardio Thoracic Surgery; EHRA, European Heart Rhythm Association;  ESC, European Society of Cardiology; HFSA, Heart Failure Society of America; HRS, Heart Rhythm Society; SAEM, Society for Academic  Emergency Medicine; SCAI, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions; SCCT, Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography;  SCMR, Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance; and STS, Society of Thoracic Surgery. Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 267 Table 2. Applying American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Class of Recommendation and Level of Evidence to Clinical Strategies,  Interventions, Treatments, or Diagnostic Testing in Patient Care * (Updated May 2019) CLASS (STRENGTH) OF RECOMMENDATION CLASS 1 (STRONG) Benefit >>> Risk Suggested phrases for writing recommendations: • Is recommended • Is indicated/useful/effective/beneficial • Should be performed/administered/other • Comparative-Effectiveness Phrases †:  – Treatment/strategy A is recommended/indicated in preference to treatment B  – Treatment A should be chosen over treatment B CLASS 2a (MODERATE) Benefit >> Risk Suggested phrases for writing recommendations: • Is reasonable • Can be useful/effective/beneficial • Comparative-Effectiveness Phrases †:  – Treatment/strategy A is probably recommended/indicated in preference to treatment B  – It is reasonable to choose treatment A over treatment B CLASS 2b (WEAK) Benefit ≥ Risk Suggested phrases for writing recommendations: • May/might be reasonable • May/might be considered • Usefulness/effectiveness is unknown/unclear/uncertain or not well-established CLASS 3: No Benefit (MODERATE) (Generally, LOE A or B use only) Benefit = Risk Suggested phrases for writing recommendations: • Is not recommended • Is not indicated/useful/effective/beneficial • Should not be performed/administered/other Class 3: Harm (STRONG) Risk > Benefit Suggested phrases for writing recommendations: • Potentially harmful • Causes harm • Associated with excess morbidity/mortallty • Should not be performed/administered/other LEVEL (QUALITY) OF EVIDENCE ‡ LEVEL A  • High-quality evidence ‡ from more than 1 RCT • Meta-analyses of high-quality RCTs • One or more RCTs corroborated by high-quality registry studies Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 268 LEVEL B-R (Randomized)  • Moderate-quality evidence ‡ from 1 or more RCTs • Meta-analyses of moderate-quality RCTs LEVEL B-NR (Nonrandomized)  • Moderate-quality evidence ‡ from 1 or more well-designed, well-executed nonrandomized studies, observational studies, or registry studies • Meta-analyses of such studies LEVEL C-LD (Limited Data)  • Randomized or nonrandomized observational or registry studies with limitations of design or execution • Meta-analyses of such studies • Physiological or mechanistic studies In human subjects LEVEL C EO (Expert Opinion)  • Consensus of expert opinion based on clinical experience COR and LOE are determined Independently (any COR may be paired with any LOE). A recommendation with LOE C does not imply that the recommendation is weak, Many important clinical questions addressed in guidelines do not lend themselves to clinical trials. Although RCTs are  unavailable, there may be a very clear clinical consensus that a particular test or therapy is useful or effective*The outcome or result of the intervention should he specified (an improved clinical outcome or increased diagnostic accuracy or incremental prognostic information).†For comparative-effectiveness recommendatiens (COR 1 and 2a; LOE A and B only), studies that support the use of comparator verbs should involve direct comparisons of the treatments or strategies  being evaluated.‡The method of assessing quality is evolving, including the application of standardized, widely-used, and preferably validated evidence grading tools, and for systematic reviews, the incorporation of an  Evidence Review Committee. COR indicates Class of Recommendation; EO, expert opinion; LD, limited data; LOE, Level of Evidence; NR, nonrandomized; R, randomized; and RCT, randomized controlled trial. Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 269 Table 3. Risk Factors for Diagnosed AF Condition Study Type Effect on Risk of AF Summary Risk of Incident  AF Effect of LRFM Risk Factors Advancing age SR/MA Age per 5 y: ↑ risk (HR, 1.43–1.66)2,3 ↑ Risk N/A MR Accelerated epigenetic age by MR: no association4 Smoking Single study Current smoking: ↑ risk (9.8%)5 ↑ Risk N/A SR/MA Smoking: ↑ risk (HR, 1.21–1.43)2,6 MR Smoking initiation: ↑ risk (OR, 1.11)7 Physical activity SR/MA Sedentary lifestyle: ↑ risk (OR, 2.47)8 Guideline-recommended physical activity: ↓ risk (HR, 0.94)9 Elite athletes vs nonathletes: ↑ risk (OR, 2.46)10 U curve: Sedentary lifestyle  and elite/extreme exercise: ↑  risk Exercise: ↓ AF burden, recurrence, symptoms; ↑ quality  of life, functional capacity11–16 Alcohol Single  studies Risk of AF episode within 4 h of 1 drink: ↑ risk (OR, 2.02)17 Greater access to alcohol law: ↑ risk18 ↑ Risk Randomized abstinence: ↑ AF recurrence and burden19 N-of-1 studies of alcohol avoidance: ↓ near-term AF20 Alcohol avoidance or reduction as part of a  comprehensive LRFM program: ↓ AF burden, symptoms,  progression of AF21–24 SR/MA Dose response (#drinks/d): ↑ risk (RR) 1: 1.08; 2: 1.17; 3: 1.33;  4: 1.36; 5: 1.4725 MR Genetically predicted heavy alcohol consumption (>35 U/wk for  women and >50 U/wk for men): ↑ risk (OR, 1.11)7 Adiposity markers:  weight, BMI, obesity Single study Obesity: population attributable fraction 12.7%–16.9%5,26 ↑ Risk Weight loss in overweight or obese patients with AF  as part of a comprehensive LRFM program: ↓ AF  symptoms, burden, recurrence, progression21–24 Bariatric surgery in class III obesity: associated with  reversal of AF type, ↑ sinus rhythm postablation27–29 Weight loss in long-lasting persistent AF and obesity:  ↔30 SR/MA BMI: RR, 1.28 per 5-unit ↑ in BMI31 Weight:2 HR, 1.12 per 15 kg ↑ MR Obesity3 Birthweight: 1.26 per SD ↑32 Childhood BMI (OR, 1.18)32 BMI 1.31 per unit BMI33 Height MA Height per 10 cm: ↑ risk (HR, 1.28)2 ↑ Risk N/A SR/MA Increasing height: ↑ risk3 MR Increasing height: ↑ risk (OR per unit, 1.33)33 Hypertension and BP Single  studies Elevated BP: ↑ risk, population attributable fraction, 21.6%5 Presence of hypertension treatment: ↑ risk (HR, 1.35–1.68),  incidence 9.8%–19.5%; both AF and SBP decreased over time26 Hypertension: ↑ risk SBP: ↑ risk DBP: ↑↓↔ risk Renal denervation: ↓ AF postablation34 Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists: ↓ AF burden35 BP control postablation: ↔36 Intensive BP control to SBP <120 mm Hg in patients  with hypertension at high risk for CVD: ↓ AF risk37 BP control as part of a comprehensive LRFM program: ↓  AF burden21–24,38 MA BP: SBP: ↑ risk (HR per 20 mm Hg, 1.22); DBP per 10 mm Hg ↓ risk (HR, 0.90); use of BP medications ↑  risk (HR, 1.42)2 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 270 Condition Study Type Effect on Risk of AF Summary Risk of Incident  AF Effect of LRFM SR/MA Hypertension: ↑ risk3 MR SBP33,39 ↑ risk; DBP mixed results ↔↑ risk39,40; pulse pressure  ↑ risk40 Resting heart rate SR/MA Resting heart rate: J-shaped relationship with incident AF.  Lowest risk at 68–80 bpm; <70 bpm (RR, 1.09 per 10 bpm ↓);  >70 bpm (RR, per 10 bpm ↑ RR 1.06)41 Slow heart rate: ↑↓ variable  risk Higher heart rate: ↑↓ variable  risk N/A MR Heart rate: <65 bpm slower (HR ↑ risk); heart rate per 5 bpm ↑,  0.8242 Diabetes Single study Diabetes: ↑ risk, population attributable fraction 3.1%5 Diabetes: ↑ risk, population attributable fraction ↑ over time  3.2%–5.9%26 ↑ Risk Optimal glycemic control preablation may ↓ AF  recurrence postablation43 MA Diabetes: ↑ risk (HR, 1.27 [95% CI, 1.10–1.46])2 SR/MA Diabetes: ↑ risk (RR, 1.28, excluding large outlying study)44 Pre-diabetes: ↑ risk (RR, 1.20)44 Blood glucose; ↑ risk (RR per 20 mg/dL ↑, 1.11)44 Cardiovascular disease HF or CAD Single study HF or CAD: population attributable fraction 5.4%5 ↑ Risk N/A HF Single  studies HF: ↑ risk but population attributable fraction ↑ d over time  7.8%–1.4%26 Bidirectional relation between AF and HF45 ↑ Risk N/A MA History of HF: ↑ risk (HR, 2.02)2 MR Genetically predicted HF: ↑ risk (OR, 1.86)46 CAD Single study MI: Population attributable fraction 3.6%26 ↑ Risk N/A MA History of MI: HR, 1.642 MR Genetically predicted CAD: OR, 1.1833 VHD Single  studies Significant heart murmur: ↑ risk (HR, 2.38)47 Significant heart murmur (any diastolic and grade ≥3/6 systolic  murmur): ↑ risk, population attributable fraction 21.9% ↓ d over  time to 3.1%26 ↑ Risk N/A MR Genetically predicted risk of AF in individuals of European  ancestry: associated with VHD with rheumatic fever (OR, 1.26)  and nonrheumatic VHD (OR, 1.27)48 Cardiac surgery Single study Multicenter validated risk prediction model: ↑ risk AF after  CABG49 ↑ Risk Prophylactic amiodarone, beta blockers: ↓↔ postop  AF50–54 Posterior left pericardiotomy during CABG, aortic valve,  ascending aortic aneurysm surgery: ↓ postop AF55,56 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 271 Condition Study Type Effect on Risk of AF Summary Risk of Incident  AF Effect of LRFM SR/MA Postop AF incidence: 23.7%–25.5%56 of cardiac surgery  patients57 Other conditions CKD SR/MA CKD: ↑ risk (HR, 1.47)58 ↑↔ Risk N/A MR Bidirectional relation between CKD and AF59 AF causal for CKD; CKD not causal for AF60 Obstructive sleep  apnea SR/MA OSA: ↑ risk (OR, 1.71), with potential dose response relation by  severity61 ↑ Risk Observational studies of SDB treatment: ↓ AF burden62– 67 Small RCTs of SDB treatment: ↔68–70 MR Genetically predicted OSA: ↑ risk (OR, 1.21)71 Thyroid disease SR/MA Clinical hyperthyroidism: ↑ risk (RR, 2.35)72 ↑ Risk MR Hyperthyroidism: ↑ risk (OR, 1.31)73 Sepsis Single study Severe sepsis: ↑ risk (OR, 6.82)74; Medicare population75 ↑ Risk N/A SR/MA Sepsis severity: ↑ risk76 Markers on ECG PR interval SR/MA Prolonged PR: ↑ risk (RR, 1.45)77 Prolonged PR: ↓ risk PR interval polygenic risk  score: ↓ risk PR interval risk SNPs:  variable ↑↓ risk N/A MR Polygenic risk score PR interval prolongation: ↓ AF risk (OR,  0.95;  P=4.30×10−8) with some variants associated with ↑ and  some with ↓ AF risk78 LVH Single study ECG LVH: Population attributable fraction 10.4% ↓ d over time  to 1.8%26 ↑ Risk N/A SR/MA LVH: ↑ risk (RR, 1.46)79 Biomarkers Natriuretic peptides MA BNP: ↑ risk (HR per 1-SD ln-BNP 1.66)80 ↑↔ Risk N/A MR Natriuretic peptides not associated81 Inflammatory  markers SR/MA CRP: ↑ risk (SMD, 0.95)82 IL-6: ↑ risk (SMD, 0.89)82 TNF-α: ↑ risk (SMD, 2.20)82 CRP IL-6, TNF-α, DUSP13,  FKBP7, Spondin-1: ↑ risk IL-6R, TNFS12: ↓ risk N/A MR DUSP13, FKBP7, Spondin-1 ↑ risk33 IL-6R, TNFS12 ↓ risk33 Lp(a) SR/MA Lp(a): HR, 1.03; only 39% of Lp(a) risk mediated via ASCVD83 ↑ Risk N/A MR Genetically predicted ↑ Lp(a): ↑ risk (HR per 23 mg/dL  genetically predicted ↑ Lp(a), 1.04)83 Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 272 Condition Study Type Effect on Risk of AF Summary Risk of Incident  AF Effect of LRFM Imaging markers LA size or function Single  studies LA anterior-posterior dimension: ↑ risk (HR per 5 mm ↑, 1.39)84 End diastolic LA volume (min): ↑ risk (HR, 1.12)85 LA emptying fraction: ↑ risk (HR, 1.03)85 ↑ LA size, emptying fraction:  ↑ risk Surgical LA reduction in conjunction with cardiac  surgery or surgical AF ablation in patients with persistent  AF may ↑ rates of sinus rhythm86–89 MR Genetic susceptibility to AF (independent measure) is associated  with ↑indexed LA size and ↓ LA ejection fraction (dependent  measures)90 LV wall thickness Single study LV posterior wall thickness: ↑ risk (HR per 4-mm ↑, 1.28)84 ↑ Risk N/A SR/MA LVH: ↑ risk (RR, 1.46)79 Social determinants of health Education Single  studies Higher education: ↑ lifetime risk of AF (US-based ARIC  study)91 Higher education in young individuals: ↓ risk of AF diagnosis  (Danish study)92 Variable ↑↓ risk N/A MR AF risk related but largely mediated via BMI (57.5%), type 2  diabetes (9.8%), SBP (18.7%), and smoking (7.1%)93 Income Single  studies Higher income: ↑ lifetime risk of AF (US-based ARIC study)91 Higher income in young individuals: ↓ risk of AF diagnosis  (Danish study)92 Variable ↑↓ risk N/A SES Single  studies Cumulative socioeconomic disadvantage: ↑ risk (HR, 1.57)94 Individual’s poorest areas: 12% ↑ d risk95 Low SES: ↑↔ risk N/A SR/MA Heterogeneous results96 Genetics Family history/ heritability Single  studies Family history of AF: ↑ risk97–99 ↑ Risk N/A MR Proportion heritability explained by loci in European ancestry  analysis, 42%100 GW AS MA Number of AF risk loci ↑s with ↑ number of subjects studied.  In 2018, 97–111 loci explained ~11%–42% of the heritability of  AF in individuals of European ancestry100,101 ↑ Risk N/A Population attributable fraction: the proportional disease incidence in the population that is estimated to be due to the risk factor. Statistically significant associations reported, unless otherwise indicated. ↓ indicates decreased; ↑, increased; ↔ no significant change in risk; AF, atrial fibrillation; ASCVD, atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease; BMI, body mass index; BNP, brain naturiuretic peptide; BP, blood  pressure; CABG, coronary artery bypass graft surgery; CAD, coronary artery disease; CI, confidence interval; CKD, chronic kidney disease; DBP, diastolic blood pressure; ECG, electrocardiogram; GW AS,  genome-wide association study; HF, heart failure; HR, hazard ratio; LA, left atrial; LRFM, lifestyle and risk factor modification; LV , left ventricular; LVH, left ventricular hypertrophy; MA, meta-analysis;  MR, Mendelian randomization; N/A, not available/applicable; OR odds ratio; RR, relative risk; OSA, obstructive sleep apnea; SMD, standardized mean difference; SBP, systolic blood pressure; SES,  socioeconomic status; SR, systematic review; and VHD, valvular heart disease. Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 273 Table 4. Definitions Term Definition AF A supraventricular tachyarrhythmia with uncoordinated atrial activation and ineffective atrial contraction Electrocardiographic characteristics include (1) irregular R-R intervals (when atrioventricular conduction is present), (2) absence of distinct P waves, and (3) irregular atrial  activity also known as fibrillatory waves. AF can be documented by, for example, 12-lead ECG, rhythm strips, wearables, intracardiac electrograms, but will always require  visual confirmation that the diagnosis is accurate. Clinical AF With the increasing availability of wearable devices and other continuous monitoring technologies, the distinction between clinical and subclinical AF has become increasingly  blurred, thus the writing committee felt the term clinical AF has become less useful. Yet, the term was kept because most of the evidence from randomized trials that have led  to guideline recommendations for the treatment of AF refer to “clinical AF.” These trials required electrocardiographic documentation of the arrhythmia for inclusion and most  patients presented for clinical evaluation and/or therapy of the arrhythmia. Subclinical AF Subclinical AF refers to this arrhythmia identified in individuals who do not have symptoms attributable to AF and in whom there are no previous ECGs documenting AF This includes AF identified by implanted devices (pacemakers, defibrillators, or implantable loop recorders) or wearable monitors Atrial high-rate  episodes These are defined as atrial events exceeding the programmed detection rate limit set by the device. These are recorded by implanted devices but require visual inspection to  confirm AF and exclude other atrial arrhythmias, artifact or oversensing. AF burden AF burden encompasses both frequency and duration and refers to the amount of AF that an individual has. AF burden has been defined differently across studies. For the  purpose of this guideline, AF burden will be defined as the durations of an an episode or as a percentage of AF duration during the monitoring period depending on how it was  defined in the individual studies. First detected AF The first documentation of AF, regardless of previous symptoms Paroxysmal AF AF that is intermittent and terminates within ≤7 d of onset Persistent AF AF that is continuous and sustains for >7 d and requires intervention. Of note, patients with persistent AF who, with therapy, become paroxysmal should still be defined as  persistent as this reflects their original pattern and is more useful to predict outcomes and define substrate. Long-standing  persistent AF AF that is continuous for >12 mo in duration Permanent AF A term that is used when the patient and clinician make a joint decision to stop further attempts to restore and/or maintain sinus rhythm Acceptance of AF represents a therapeutic decision and does not represent an inherent pathophysiological attribute of AF Terms considered obsolete Chronic AF This historical term has had variable definitions and should be abandoned. It has been replaced by the “paroxysmal,” “persistent,” “longstanding persistent,” and “permanent”  terminology. Valvular and  nonvalvular AF The distinction between “valvular” and “nonvalvular “AF remains a matter of debate. Their definitions may be confusing. Recent trials comparing vitamin K antagonists with  non-vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulants in AF were performed among patients with so-called “nonvalvular” AF. These trials have all allowed native valvular heart disease  other than mitral stenosis (mostly moderate and severe) and prosthetic heart valves to be included. We should no longer consider the classification of AF as “valvular” or  “nonvalvular” for the purpose of defining the etiology of AF, since the term was specific for eligibility of stroke risk reduction therapies. Valvular and nonvalvular terminology  should be abandoned. Lone AF This term has been used in the past to identify AF in younger patients without structural heart disease who are at a lower risk for thromboembolism. This term does not enhance  patient care, is not currently used, and should be abandoned. AF indicates atrial fibrillation. Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 274 Table 5. Publicly Available Decision Aids Agency Website Focus Area American College of Cardiology Colorado Program  for Patient Centered Decisions https://patientdecisionaid.org/icd/atrial-fibrillation/ Stroke risk reduction therapies Anticoagulation Choice Decision Aid https://anticoagulationdecisionaid.mayoclinic.org/ Stroke risk reduction therapies Ottawa Hospital Research Institute Developer  Healthwise https://decisionaid.ohri.ca/AZlist.html AF ablation Stroke risk reduction Stanford https://afibguide.com/ Stroke risk reduction therapies Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 275 Table 6. CHARGE-AF Risk Score for Detecting Incident AF* Variable (X) Estimated β Coefficient (SE) HR (95% CI) Age (per 5-y increment) 0.508 (0.022) 1.66 (1.59–1.74) White race 0.465 (0.093) 1.59 (1.33–1.91) Height (per 10-cm increment) 0.248 (0.036) 1.28 (1.19–1.38) Weight (per 15-kg increment) 0.115 (0.033) 1.12 (1.05–1.20) Systolic BP (per 20-mm Hg increment) 0.197 (0.033) 1.22 (1.14–1.30) Diastolic BP (per 10-mm Hg increment) −0.101 (0.032) 0.90 (0.85–0.96) Smoking (current versus former/never) 0.359 (0.063) 1.42 (1.25–1.60) Diabetes (yes) 0.237 (0.073) 1.27 (1.64–2.48) Myocardial infarction (yes) 0.496 (0.089) 1.64 (1.38–1.96) Table 6 does not encompass all complications. *Five-year risk is given by: 1 − 0.9718412736exp(ΣβX − 124411305), where β is the regression coefficient (column 2) and X is the level of each  variable risk factor.2 AF indicates atrial fibrillation; BP, blood pressure; CHARGE-AF, Cohorts for Heart and Aging Research in Genomic Epidemiology model for  atrial fibrillation; HR, hazard ratio; and SE, standard error. Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 276 Table 7. C2HEST Risk Score for Detecting Incident AF* Acronym Risk Factor Points C2 CAD/COPD 1–2 H Hypertension 1 E Elderly (age ≥75 y) 2 S Systolic heart failure 2 T Thyroid disease (hyperthyroidism) 1 *Total points 0–8. For the C2HEST score, the C statistic was 0.749, with 95% CI of 0.729–0.769.10 The incident rate of AF increased significantly  with higher C2HEST scores. AF indicates atrial fibrillation; CAD, coronary artery disease; C2HEST, coronary artery disease or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [1 point  each]; hypertension [1 point]; elderly [age ≥75 y, 2 points]; systolic HF [2 points]; thyroid disease [hyperthyroidism, 1 point]; and COPD, chronic  obstructive pulmonary disease. Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 277 Table 8. Three Validated Risk Models for Stroke Risk Factor CHA2DS2-V ASc2 ATRIA1 GARFIELD3 Age ≥85 y 6 0.98 Age ≥75 y 2 5 0.59 Age 65–74 y 1 3 0.20 Female sex 1 1 Hypertension 1 0.16 Renal disease 1 0.35 Diabetes 1 1 0.21 Current smoking 0.48 Congestive heart failure 1 1 0.23 Previous stroke or TIA 2 2–8* 0.80 Vascular disease 1 0.20 Dementia 0.51 Previous bleeding 0.30 Proteinuria 1 Low risk score 0 0–5 0–0.89 Intermediate risk score 1 6 0.90–1.59 High risk score ≥2 7–15 ≥1.60 C-index (11) 0.63 0.66 C-index (13) 0.67 - 0.71 *8 points if age <65 y; 4 points if age 65–74 y; 2 points if age 75–84 y; and 3 points if ≥85 y. ATRIA indicates Anticoagulation and Risk Factors in Atrial Fibrillation: anemia, renal disease, elderly (age ≥75 y), any previous bleeding,  hypertension; CHA2DS2-V ASc, indicates congestive heart failure, hypertension, age ≥75 y (doubled), diabetes mellitus, prior stroke or transient  ischemic attack or thromboembolism (doubled), vascular disease, age 65 to 74 y, sex category; GARFIELD-AF, Global Anticoagulant Registry in  the Field-Atrial Fibrillation; and TIA, transient ischemic attack. Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 278 Table 9. Some Best Known Published Clinical Scores With Potential Advantages Year of  Publication, Score  Name Score Components Potential Advantages No. of  Validation  Studies19 Hyperlink to Online Score  Calculator, if Available 2001 CHADS225 CHF, hypertension, age (≥65 y is 1 point, ≥75  y is 2 points), diabetes, stroke/TIA (2 points) CHADS2 was superior to existing risk classification schemes AFI scheme: C-statistic, 0.68 (0.65–0.71) SPAF-III scheme: C-statistic, 0.74 (0.71–0.76) CHADS2 score: C-statistic, 0.82 (0.80–0.84) 46 https://www.mdcalc.com/calc/40/ chads2-score-atrial-fibrillationstroke-risk 2010 CHA2DS2V ASc2 CHF, hypertension, age ≥75 y, diabetes,  stroke or TIA, vascular disease, age 65–74  y, female sex Most commonly used and studied, superior to CHADS2 score. Cstatistic, 0.606 (0.513–0.699) for CHA2DS2-V ASc score vs 0.561  (0.450–0.672) for CHADS2 score Improved compared with original CHADS2 score 82 https://www.mdcalc.com/calc/801/ cha2ds2-vasc-score-atrialfibrillation-stroke-risk#next-steps 2013 ATRIA1 Age (65–74 y is 3 points, 75–84 y is 5 points,  ≥85 y is 6 points), hypertension, diabetes,  CHF, proteinuria, GFR <45 mL/min/1.73 m2,  sex Includes more age categories, renal function, and proteinuria More  patients were classified as low or high risk but not as well tested in  general. 11 https://www.mdcalc.com/calc/1842/ atria-stroke-risk-score 2017 GARFIELDAF3 Web-based, uses routinely collected clinical  data, and includes a total of 16 questions Web-based tool for predicting stroke and mortality, includes the  effect of the different anticoagulants, bleeding risk and mortality to  facilitate shared decision-making on the potential benefits/risks of  anticoagulation 4 https://af.garfieldregistry.org/ garfield-af-risk-calculator 2016 MCHA2DS2V ASc26 Expanded lower threshold for age to 50 y (1  point for age 50–74 y) Validated in Asian cohort Can further identify Asian AF patients who may derive benefits from  stroke prevention. In 1 study, MCHA2DS2-V ASc was superior to  CHA2DS2-V ASc C-statistics = 0.708 (0.703–0.712) vs 0.689 (0.684–0.694) 1 ATRIA indicates Anticoagulation and Risk Factors in Atrial Fibrillation: anemia, renal disease, elderly (age ≥75 y), any previous bleeding, hypertension; CHADS2, congestive heart failure, hypertension,  age >75 y, diabetes, stroke/transient ischemia attack/thromboembolism; CHA2DS2-V ASc, indicates congestive heart failure, hypertension, age ≥75 y (doubled), diabetes mellitus, prior stroke or transient  ischemic attack or thromboembolism (doubled), vascular disease, age 65 to 74 y, sex category; CHF, congestive heart failure; GARFIELD-AF, Global Anticoagulant Registry in the Field-Atrial Fibrillation;  GFR, glomerular filtration rate; SPAF-III, stroke prevention atrial fibrillation, and TIA, transient ischemic attack. Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 279 Table 10. Risk Factor Definitions for CHA2DS2-V ASc Score as in the Original Article2 C Heart Failure The presence of signs and symptoms of either right (elevated central venous pressure, hepatomegaly,  dependent edema) or left ventricular failure (exertional dyspnea, cough, fatigue, orthopnea, paroxysmal  nocturnal dyspnea, cardiac enlargement, rales, gallop rhythm, pulmonary venous congestion) or both,  confirmed by noninvasive or invasive measurements demonstrating objective evidence of cardiac  dysfunction H Hypertension A resting blood pressure >140 mm Hg systolic and/or >90 mm Hg diastolic on at least 2 occasions or  current antihypertensive pharmacological treatment A2 Age, additional risk/point Age ≥75 y D Diabetes Fasting plasma glucose level ≥70 mmol/L (126 mg/dL) or treatment with hypoglycemic agent and/or insulin S2 Thromboembolism Either an ischemic stroke, transient ischemic attack, peripheral embolism, or pulmonary embolism V Vascular Disease Coronary artery disease (prior myocardial infarction, angina pectoris, percutaneous coronary intervention,  or coronary artery bypass surgery) or peripheral vascular disease (the presence of any of the following:  intermittent claudication, previous surgery or percutaneous intervention on the abdominal aorta or the lower  extremity vessels, abdominal or thoracic vascular surgery, arterial and venous thrombosis) A Age standard risk/weight Age 65–74 y Sc Sex Category Female sex Modified with permission from Lip et al.2 Copyright 2010, with permission from Elsevier. Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 280 Table 11. Additional Risk Factors That Increase Risk of Stroke Not Included in CHA2DS2-V ASc Higher AF burden/Long duration Persistent/permanent AF versus paroxysmal Obesity (BMI, ≥30 kg/m2) HCM Poorly controlled hypertension eGFR (<45 mL/h) Proteinuria (>150 mg/24 h or equivalent) Enlarged LA volume (≥73 mL) or diameter (≥4.7 cm) AF indicates atrial fibrillation; BMI, body mass index; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate; HCM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; and LA,  left atrium. Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 281 Table 12. Thromboembolic Event Rates by Point Score for ATRIA, CHADS2, and CHA2DS2-V ASc Risk Scores * ATRIA CHADS2† CHA2DS2-V ASc‡ Points Events Person-Years Rate per 100 Person-Years Events Person-Years Rate per 100 Person-Years Events Person-Years Rate per 100 Person-Years 0 2 2652 0.08 22 6126 0.36 1 2493 0.04 1 12 2819 0.43 121 10 084 1.20 21 3806 0.55 2 14 1419 0.99 253 9757 2.59 46 5560 0.83 3 13 1780 0.73 178 4782 3.72 121 7305 1.66 4 19 2960 0.64 81 1309 6.19 193 6898 2.80 5 36 3614 0.99 19 450 4.23 175 4057 4.31 6 83 4346 1.91 11 101 10.84 85 1783 4.77 7 119 4768 2.50 – – – 24 498 4.82 8 151 3913 3.86 – – – 14 179 782 9 104 2400 4.33 – – – 5 30 16.62 10 75 1181 6.35 – – – – – – 11 31 501 6.18 – – – – – – 12 20 183 10.95 – – – – – – 13 4 53 752 – – – – – – 14 2 12 16.36 – – – – – – 15 0 7 0 – – – – – – All 685 32 609 2.10 – – – – – – Reproduced with permission from Singer et al.1 Copyright 2013 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley-Blackwell. This is an open access article under the  terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited and is not used for  commercial purposes.*Black lines identify thresholds for low-, moderate-, and high-risk categories for the 3 stroke risk point scores using published cut points.8,9 †The CHADS2 score assigns points as follows: 1 point each for the presence of congestive heart failure, hypertension, age ≥75 y, and diabetes mellitus and 2 points for history of stroke/transient ischemic  attack.‡The CHA2DS2-V ASc score assigns points as follows: 1 point each for congestive heart failure/left ventricular dysfunction, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, vascular disease, age 65 to 74 y, and female sex,  and 2 points each for age ≥75 y and stroke/transient ischemic attack/thromboembolism. Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 282 ATRIA indicates Anticoagulation and Risk Factors in Atrial Fibrillation: anemia, renal disease, elderly (age ≥75 y), any previous bleeding, hypertension; CHADS2, congestive heart failure, hypertension,  age >75 y, diabetes, stroke/transient ischemia attack/thromboembolism; and CHA2DS2-V ASc, indicates congestive heart failure, hypertension, age ≥75 y (doubled), diabetes mellitus, prior stroke or  transient ischemic attack or thromboembolism (doubled), vascular disease, age 65 to 74 y, sex category. Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 283 Table 13. OACs Pharmacokinetic Characteristics and Dosing Class VKA Direct Thrombin Inhibitor Factor Xa Inhibitor Name Warfarin Dabigatran Rivaroxaban Apixaban Edoxaban Metabolism S-isomer:  CYP2C9 R-isomer:  CYP1A2,  CYP2C19,  CYP3A4 Minimal CYP3A4/5 CYP3A4 Minimal CYP3A4 P-glycoprotein substrate No Yes Yes Yes Yes Excretion 0% renal; very  little warfarin  excreted  unchanged in  urine 80% renal 66% renal, 28% feces 27% renal, 73% biliary and intestinal 50% renal, 50% liver and  biliary/intestinal Half-life 20–60 h 12–17 h 5–9 h 12 h 10–14 h Renal dosing adjustment  based on actual body  weight N/A CrCl >30  mL/min 150 mg  twice daily CrCl >50  mL/min 20 mg daily with  the biggest meal * 5 mg twice daily CrCl >50– ≤95 mL/min 60 mg once  daily CrCl 15–30  mL/min 75 mg twice  daily CrCl 15–50  mL/min 15 mg daily with  the biggest meal * If any 2 of the  following: age ≥80y,  body weight ≤60 kg,  SCr ≥1.5 mg/dL 2.5 mg twice  daily CrCl 15–50  mL/min 30 mg once  daily Drug interaction  management based on  concomitant therapy  of CYP3A4 inhibitors/pglycoprotein inhibitors Adjust dose  based on INR  trends CrCl 30–50 mL/min  with concomitant use of  dronedarone or systemic  ketoconazole: 75 mg twice  daily CrCl <30 mL/min: avoid  dabigatran use concomitantly  with dronedarone or systemic  ketoconazole Avoid rivaroxaban use with  concomitant therapy of combined  p-glycoprotein and strong  CYP3A4 inhibitors (eg, systemic  ketoconazole and ritonavir) No dose adjustment required with  clarithromycin Avoid rivaroxaban use in patients  with CrCl 15–<80 mL/min receiving  combined p-glycoprotein and  moderate CYP3A4 inhibitors (eg,  erythromycin) In patients receiving apixaban 5 mg twice  daily, reduce dose to 2.5 mg twice daily  when combined p-glycoprotein and strong  CYP3A4 inhibitors (eg, itraconazole,  systemic ketoconazole, ritonavir) are used  concomitantly If patients already receiving apixaban  2.5 mg twice daily, avoid apixaban use  if combined p-glycoprotein and strong  CYP3A4 inhibitors are concomitantly used No dose adjustment is  required Drug interaction  management based  on concomitant  therapy of p-glycoprotein/ CYP3A4 inducers  (eg, carbamazepine,  phenytoin, rifampin, St.  John’s wort) Adjust dose  based on INR  trends Avoid use Avoid use Avoid use Avoid use with rifampin. No  study evaluated the effect  of other p-glycoprotein/ CYP3A4 inducers on  edoxaban drug levels Appropriate use based  on liver function (ChildNot mentioned in  the labeling No dose adjustment needed No dose adjustment needed No dose adjustment needed No dose adjustment needed Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 284 Class VKA Direct Thrombin Inhibitor Factor Xa Inhibitor Name Warfarin Dabigatran Rivaroxaban Apixaban Edoxaban Pugh score) † Child-Pugh A (mild)  Child-Pugh B  (moderate) Use with caution Avoid use Use with caution Use with caution  Child-Pugh C (severe) Avoid use Avoid use Avoid use Avoid use Information obtained from manufacturer package inserts.13,14,20–22 Adapted with permission from pgs. 28–31 of Kido et al.23 Copyright 2021 American College of Clinical Pharmacy. *The effect of food (high-fat, high-calorie meal) on bioavailability for 10- and 20-mg tablet was evaluated in 24 subjects under fed and fasting conditions. After a single oral 20-mg dose, area under the  curve was increased by 39%, and Cmax was increased by 76% under fed condition, but area under the cuive and Cmax were similar between fasting and fed conditions.19 †Child-Pugh scoring: the severity of liver disease, primarily cirrhosis. Child-Pugh A (mild): 5 to 6 points; Child-Pugh B (moderate): 7 to 9 points; Child-Pugh C (severe): 10 to 15 points. The score is  based on the 5 variables: encephalopathy (none=1 point, grade 1 and 2=2 points, grade 3 and 4=3 points); ascites (none=1 point, slight=2 points, moderate=3 points); total bilirubin (<2 mg/mL=1 point, 2–3  mg/mL=2 points, >3 mg/mL=3 points); albumin (>3.5 mg/mL=1 point, 2.8–3.5 mg/mL=2 points, <2.8 mg/mL=3 points); INR (<1.7=1 point, 1.7–2.2=2 points, >2.2=3 points). CrCl indicates creatinine clearance; INR, international normalized ratio; OAC, oral anticoagulant; Scr, serum creatinine; and VKA, vitamin K antagonist. Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 285 Table 14. Situations in Which Long-Term Anticoagulation Is Contraindicated and Situations When It Remains  Reasonable Long-Term Anticoagulation Contraindicated Long-Term Anticoagulation Is Still Reasonable Severe bleeding due to a nonreversible cause involving the gastrointestinal,  pulmonary, or genitourinary systems Spontaneous intracranial/intraspinal bleeding due to a nonreversible cause Serious bleeding related to recurrent falls when cause of falls is not felt to be  treatable Bleeding involving the gastrointestinal, pulmonary, or  genitourinary systems that is treatable Bleeding related to isolated trauma Bleeding related to procedural complications Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 286 Table 15. Reversal Agents for Oral Anticoagulants Idarucizumab Andexanet alfa 4-Factor PCC Activated PCC Class Humanized monoclonal antibody fragment  binding to dabigatran and neutralizing  anticoagulation effects A recombinant modified human factor Xa protein  binding and sequestering the factor Xa inhibitors PCC: coagulation factors II, VII, IX, and X Anticoagulation proteins C and S Nonactivated factors II, IX,  and X Activated VII FDA  indications Reversal of dabigatran effects For emergency surgery/urgent procedures Life-threatening or uncontrolled bleeding Reversal of apixaban or rivaroxaban For life-threatening or uncontrolled bleeding The urgent reversal for acute major bleeding  or need for an urgent surgery/invasive  procedure in patients receiving VKAs Control and prevention  of bleeding episodes,  perioperative management,  prophylaxis to prevent or  reduce bleeding frequency  in patients with hemophilia  A and B Off-label  indications N/A Edoxaban-associated life-threatening bleeding Reversal of factor Xa inhibitors in patients  requiring urgent procedure or with lifethreatening bleeding Dabigatran-associated lifethreatening bleeding Dosing 5-g (2 separate vials of 2.5 g/vial) intravenous  infusion over 5 min. Additional 5 g may be  given if reappearance of bleeding with elevated  coagulation parameters have been observed  or patients require second emergency surgery/ procedure and elevated coagulation parameters Low-dose regimen: 400-mg bolus at a target rate  of 30 mg/min followed by 4 mg/min for up to 120  min High-dose regimen: 800-mg bolus at a target rate  of 30 mg/min followed by 8 mg/min for up to 120  min The recommended dosing is based on apixaban or  rivaroxaban, dose, and time since the patient’s last  dose of apixaban or rivaroxaban Warfarin reversal based on pretreatment INR  (units of factor IX): 1. INR 2–<4: 25 units/kg |(up to 2500 units) 2. INR 4–6: 35 units/kg (up to 3500 units) 3. INR >6: 50 units/kg (up to 5000 units) Oral factor Xa inhibitors: 2000 units once or 25 to 50 units/kg Dabigatran-associated lifethreatening bleeding: 50  units/kg once Onset Within 5 min Within 2 min Within 10 min Within 30 min Duration 12–24 h 2 h 8 h 12 h Monitoring Coagulation parameters (aPTT, diluted  thrombin time, or ecarin clotting time)  between 12 and 24 h to assess redistribution  of dabigatran from peripheral to plasma Current commercial anti-Xa activity assays are  unsuitable for measuring factor Xa activities after  andexanet alfa use Warfarin reversal: Repeat INR within 30 min  after the administration N/A Others Risk of serious reactions (hypoglycemia,  hypophosphatemia, metabolic acidosis,  increase in uric acid, acute liver failure) in  patients with hereditary fructose intolerance  (due to sorbitol excipient 4 g in each 5 g of  idarucizumab) No procoagulant effect based on endogenous  thrombin potential No FDA indication for other factor Xa inhibitors  other than apixaban or rivaroxaban Andexanet alfa may interfere with the  anticoagulation effect of heparin US black box warning: Serious and lifethreatening adverse events (arterial and venous  thromboembolism, myocardial infarction, ischemic  stroke, cardiac arrest, sudden deaths) May not be indicated for patients with  thromboembolic events in the previous 3 mo It includes heparin Administer intravenous vitamin K 10 mg over  10–20 min in addition to 4-factor PCC It does not include heparin Coagulation parameters do  not correlate with the  drug’s efficacy Not effective to reverse  factor Xa inhibitors Information in table was obtained from manufacturer package inserts. aPTT indicates activated partial thromboplastin time; FDA, US Food and Drug Administration; PCC, prothrombin complex concentrate; and VKA, vitamin K antagonists. Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 287 Table 16. Bleeding Events (Percentage Per Year) in DOAC Pivotal Clinical Trials Bleeding Event RE-LY (n=18 113) ARISTOTLE (n=18 201) ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48 (n=21 105) ROCKET AF (n=14 264) Major bleeding Dabigatran 150 mg 3.11% (RR, 0.93 [95% CI,  0.81–1.07];  P=0.31) Dabigatran 110 mg 2.71% (RR, 0.80 [95% CI,  0.69–0.93];  P=0.003) Warfarin 3.36% Apixaban 2.13% (HR, 0.69  [95% CI, 0.60–0.80];  P<0.001) Warfarin 3.09% Edoxaban 60 mg 2.75% vs warfarin 3.43% (HR,  0.80 [95% CI, 0.71–0.91];  P<0.001) Edoxaban 30 mg 1.61% vs warfarin 3.43% (HR,  0.47 [95% CI, 0.41–0.55];  P<0.001) Rivaroxaban 3.6% vs warfarin  3.4% (HR, 1.04 [95% CI,  0.90–1.20];  P=0.58) Gastrointestinal  bleeding Dabigatran 150 mg 1.51% vs warfarin 1.02% (RR,  1.50 [95% CI, 1.19–1.89];  P<0.001) Dabigatran 110 mg 1.12% vs warfarin 1.02% (RR,  1.10 [95% CI, 0.86–1.41];  P=0.43) Apixaban 0.76% (HR, 0.89  [95% CI, 0.70–1.15];  P=0.37) Warfarin 0.86% Edoxaban 60 mg 1.51% (HR, 1.23 [95% CI, 1.02– 1.50];  P=0.03) Edoxaban 30 mg 0.82% (HR, 0.67 [95% CI, 0.53– 0.83];  P<0.001) Warfarin 1.23% Rivaroxaban 3.2% (HR not  reported;  P<0.001) Warfarin 2.2% Intracranial  bleeding Dabigatran 150 mg 0.30% (RR, 0.40 [95% CI,  0.27–0.60];  P<0.001) Dabigatran 110 mg 0.23% (RR, 0.31 [95% CI,  0.20–0.47];  P<0.001) Warfarin 0.74% Apixaban 0.33% (HR, 0.42  [95% CI, 0.30–0.58];  P<0.001) Warfarin 0.80% Edoxaban 60 mg 0.39% (HR, 0.47 [95% CI, 0.34– 0.63];  P<0.001) Edoxaban 30 mg 0.26% (HR, 0.30 [95% CI, 0.21– 0.43];  P<0.001) Warfarin 0.85% Rivaroxaban 0.80% (HR, 0.67  [95% CI, 0.47–0.93];  P=0.02) Warfarin 1.20% Adapted with permission from Kido et al.22 Copyright 2021 American College of Clinical Pharmacy. ARISTOTLE indicates Apixaban for Reduction in Stroke and Other Thromboembolic Events in Atrial Fibrillation; DOAC, direct anticoagulant; ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48, Effective Anticoagulation with  Factor Xa Next Generation in Atrial Fibrillation – Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction 48; HR indicates hazard ratio; RE-LY , Randomized Evaluation of Long-Term Anticoagulation Therapy; ROCKET  AF, Rivaroxaban Once Daily Oral Direct Factor Xa Inhibition Compared with Vitamin K Antagonism for Prevention of Stroke and Embolism Trial in Atrial Fibrillation; and RR, relative risk. Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 288 Table 17. Risk Factors for Thromboembolic Complications and Recurrent ICH Factors Associated With High Risk of Thromboembolism Factors Associated With High Risk of Recurrent ICH Mechanical heart valve Suspected cerebral amyloid angiopathy Rheumatic valve disease Lobar IPH Previous history of stroke/thromboembolism Older age Hypercoagulable state (eg, active malignancy, genetic thrombophilia) >10 cerebral microbleeds on MRI High CHA2DS2-V ASc score (>5) Disseminated cortical superficial siderosis on MRI Poorly controlled hypertension Previous history of spontaneous ICH Genetic/acquired coagulopathy Untreated symptomatic vascular malformation or aneurysm CHA2DS2-V ASc indicates congestive heart failure, hypertension, age ≥75 y (doubled), diabetes mellitus, prior stroke or transient ischemic attack  or thromboembolism (doubled), vascular disease, age 65 to 74 y, sex category; ICH, intracranial hemorrhage; IPH, intraparenchymal hemorrhage;  and MRI, magnetic resonance imaging. Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 289 Table 18. Timing of Discontinuation of OACs in Patients With AF Scheduled to Undergo an Invasive Procedure or  Surgery in Whom Anticoagulation Is to Be Interrupted Anticoagulant Low Bleeding Risk Procedure High Bleeding Risk Procedure Apixaban (CrCl >25 mL/min)* 1 d† 2 d Dabigatran (CrCl >50 mL/min) 1 d 2 d Dabigatran (CrCl 30–50 mL/min) 2 d 4 d Edoxaban (CrCl >15 mL/min) 1 d 2 d Rivaroxaban (CrCl >30 mL/min) 1 d 2 d Warfarin 5 d for a target INR <1.5 2–3 d for a target INR <2 5 d *For patients on DOAC with creatinine clearance lower than the values in the table, few clinical data exist. Consider holding for an additional 1 to 3  days, especially for high bleeding risk procedures. †The number of days is the number of full days before the day of surgery in which the patient does not take any dose of anticoagulant. The drug is  also not taken the day of surgery. For example, in the case of holding a twice daily drug for 1 day, if the drug is taken at 8 pm, and surgery is at 8  am, at the time of surgery, it will be 36 hours since the last dose was taken. AF indicates atrial fibrillation; CrCl, creatinine clearance; DOAC, direct oral anticoagulation; INR, international normalized ratio; and OAC, oral  anticoagulant. Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 290 Table 19. Recommended Doses of Currently Approved DOACs According to Renal Function DOAC CrCl (mL/min) >95 51–95 31–50 15–30 <15 or on dialysis Apixaban 5 or 2.5 mg twice daily * 5 or 2.5 mg twice daily * 5 or 2.5 mg twice daily * 5 or 2.5 mg twice daily * 5 or 2.5 mg twice daily * Dabigatran 150 mg twice daily 150 mg twice daily 150 mg twice daily 75 mg twice daily Contraindicated Edoxaban Contraindicated 60 mg once daily 30 mg once daily 30 mg once daily Contraindicated Rivaroxaban 20 mg once daily 20 mg once daily 15 mg once daily 15 mg once daily 15 mg once daily † Note that other, nonrenal considerations such as drug interactions may also apply. The gray area indicates doses not studied in the pivotal clinical trials of these agents.*If at least 2 of the following are present: serum creatinine ≥1.5 mg/dL, age ≥80 y, or body weight ≤60 kg, the recommended dose is 2.5 mg twice daily. The ARISTOTLE trial excluded patients with either  a creatinine of >2.5 mg/dL or a calculated CrCl <25 mL/min.†Rivaroxaban is not recommended for other indications in patients with a CrCl <15 mL/min, but such a recommendation is not made for the AF indication. However, pharmacokinetic data are limited. AF indicates atrial fibrillation; ARISTOTLE, Apixaban for Reduction in Stroke and Other Thromboembolic Events in Atrial Fibrillation; CrCl, creatinine clearance; and DOAC, direct oral anticoagulant. Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 291 Table 20 Clinical Presentations and Objectives of Heart Rate Control Presentation Objective Symptomatic AF To reduce symptoms Tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy To improve heart function or reduce the risk of recurrent cardiomyopathy19 ICD use To reduce risk of inappropriate shock20 Cardiac resynchronization therapy use To enhance biventricular pacing, likelihood of myocardial recovery, and/or  preservation of function21 Tachycardia-bradycardia form of sick sinus syndrome  among those with a pacemaker To reduce the risk of hospitalization22 AF indicates atrial fibrillation; and ICD, implantable cardioverter-defibrillator. Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 292 Table 21. Pharmacological Agents for Rate Control in Patients With AF Intravenous Administration Oral Maintenance Dose Elimination Half-Life Notes Beta blockers  Metoprolol tartrate 2.5–5 mg bolus over 2 min; up to 3 doses 25–200 mg, twice daily 3–4 h  Metoprolol succinate N/A 50–400 mg daily or twice daily in  divided doses 3–7 h  Atenolol N/A 25–100 mg daily 6–7 h Renally eliminated  Bisoprolol N/A 2.5–10 mg daily 9–12 h  Carvedilol N/A 3.125–25 mg, twice daily 7–10 h  Esmolol 500 μg/kg bolus over 1 min; then 50–300 μg/kg/min N/A 9 min  Nadolol N/A 10–240 mg daily 20–24 h  Propranolol 1 mg over 1 min; repeat as needed every 2 min; up to 3 doses 10–40 mg, 3–4 times daily IV: 2.4 h Oral: 3–6 h ER: 8–20 h Nondihydropyridine calcium channel blockers  Diltiazem 0.25 mg/kg (actual body weight) IV over 2 min May repeat  0.35 mg/kg over 2 min; then 5–15 mg/h continuous infusion 120–360 mg daily (ER) IV: 3–5 h Oral immediate release: 3–4.5 h ER: 4–9.5 h Avoid in HFrEF  Verapamil 5–10 mg over ≥2 min (may repeat twice); then 5 mg/h  continuous infusion (max 20 mg/h) 180–480 mg daily (ER) IV: 6–8 h Oral: 2–7 h ER: 12–17 h Avoid in HFrEF Digitalis glycoside  Digoxin 0.25–0.5 mg over several min; repeat doses of 0.25 mg every  6 h (maximum 1.5 mg/24 h) 0.0625–0.25 mg daily 1–2 d Renally eliminated Increased  mortality at plasma  concentrations exceeding 1.2  ng/mL Other  Amiodarone 150–300 mg IV over 1 h, then 10–50 mg/h over 24 h 100–200 mg daily (generally IV form  used for rate control) IV: 9–36 d Oral: 26–107 d Loading dose 6–10 g  administered over 2–4 wk;  can combine IV and oral  dosing to complete AF indicates atrial fibrillation; ER, extended release; HFrEF, heart failure with reduced ejection fraction; IV , intravenous; and N/A, not applicable. Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 293 Table 22. Drugs for Pharmacological Conversion of AF to Sinus Rhythm Drug Route of  Administration Loading Dose Maintenance Dose Approximate Time  to Conversion to  Sinus Rhythm Primary Route(s)  of Elimination Elimination HalfLife Major Adverse Effects Amiodarone IV 5–7 mg/kg or 300 mg * 1200–3000 mg via  continuous infusion  over 24 h 8–12 h Liver metabolism Biliary excretion 9–36 d Bradycardia Hypotension QT prolongation Phlebitis TdP Flecainide Oral † 200 mg if <70 kg, 300 mg if >70 kg,  single dose N/A 3–8 h Liver (70%) Kidney (30%) ‡ 12–27 h Atrial flutter A V block Dizziness Dyspnea Exacerbation of HFrEF Headache Nausea QT prolongation VT Visual disturbances Ibutilide IV ≥60 kg: 1 mg over 10 min <60 kg: 0.01 mg/kg over 10 min If arrhythmia does not terminate  within 10 min after the end of  the first infusion, may administer a  second dose, equal to the first dose. N/A 30–90 min Liver 2–12 h Nonsustained VT QT prolongation TdP Procainamide IV 1 g over 30 min 2 mg/min continuous  infusion over 1 h 30–60 min Liver (16–33%) Kidney (50–65%) ‡ 3–4 h (parent) 7 h (NAPA) Agranulocytosis A V block Exacerbation of HFrEF Hypotension Neutropenia QT prolongation Rash Thrombocytopenia TdP Propafenone Oral 450 mg if <70 kg, 600 mg if >70 kg,  single dose N/A 3–8 h Liver 9 h Atrial flutter A V block Dizziness Dyspnea Exacerbation of HFrEF Nausea Taste disturbances VT Visual disturbances *Some studies have administered intravenous amiodarone for 24 h followed by oral administration.†Flecainide is available in an intravenous dosage form in Europe. Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 294 ‡Percentage of a dose excreted unchanged in urine. A V indicates atrioventricular; AF, atrial fibrillation; HFrEF, heart failure with reduced ejection fraction; IV , intravenous; N/A, not applicable; NAPA, N-acetylprocainamide; TdP, torsades de pointes; and  VT, ventricular tachycardia. Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 295 Table 23. Specific Drug Therapy for Maintenance of Sinus Rhythm in Patients With AF Drug Loading Dose Maintenance Dose Primary  Route(s) of  Elimination Elimination  Half-Life Mechanism of  Action Major Adverse Effects Important Pharmacokinetic Drug  Interactions Amiodarone Total loading dose  6–10 g, given 400– 800 mg daily in 2–4  divided doses for 1–4  wk 200 mg once daily Liver  metabolism Biliary  excretion 14–59 d lnhibits IKr, IKs, INa,  IKur, Ito, ICa-L, IKAch  Noncompetitive beta  blocker A V block Bradycardia Corneal microdeposits Elevation in  transaminases Hepatotoxicity Hyperthyroidism Hypothyroidism Nausea QT prolongation Peripheral neuropathy Photosensitivity Pulmonary fibrosis Skin pigmentation (bluegray) TdP Moderate * inhibitor of CYP2C9, weak †  inhibitor of CYP2D6 Some inhibition of CYP3A lncreases plasma concentrations of  warfarin, lovastatin, ‡ simvastatin, §  cyclosporine lnhibits p-gp lncreases plasma concentrations of  digoxin Dofetilide N/A CrCl >60 mL/min: 500  μg twice daily CrCl 40–60 mL/min:  250 μg twice daily CrCl 20–40 mL/min:  125 μg twice daily CrCl <20 mL/min:  Contraindicated Kidney 10 h Inhibits IKr and  aigments late INa QT prolongation TdP Dofetilide is renally excreted via  the renal cation transport system.  These drugs inhibit renal cation  transport, increase plasma dofetilide  concentrations, and are contraindicated in  patients taking dofetilide: Cimetidine Dolitegravir Ketoconazole Megestrol Prochlorperazine Trimethoprim (alone or in combination  with sulfamethoxazole) Verapamil ln addition, hydrochlorothiazide  (alone or in combination with  triamterene) increases plasma dofetilide  concentrations and should not be  coadministered with dofetilide Dronedarone N/A 400 mg twice daily Liver  metabolism 13–19 h lnhibits IKr IKs, INa,  IKur, Ito, ICa-L, IKAch  Noncompetitive beta  blocker Abdominal pain Asthenia Bradycardia Diarrhea Nausea and vomiting QT prolongation Rash TdP Dronedarone is a substrate for CYP3A  and is a moderate inhibitor of CYP3A  and CYP2D6 Dronedarone is also a substrate for, and  inhibitor of, p-gp Dronedarone may increase plasma  concentrations of: Dabigatran Digoxin Simvastatin ∥ Sirolimus Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 296 Drug Loading Dose Maintenance Dose Primary  Route(s) of  Elimination Elimination  Half-Life Mechanism of  Action Major Adverse Effects Important Pharmacokinetic Drug  Interactions Tacrolimus Warfarin These drugs may increase plasma  dronedarone concentrations: Grapefruit juice These drugs may decrease plasma  dronedarone concentrations: CYP3A inducers including St. John’s  wort, rifampin, and phenytoin Flecainide N/A 50–300 mg/d PO  divided q 8–12 h Liver (70%) Kidney (30%)¶ 12–27 h Inhibits INa Atrial flutter A V block Dizziness Dyspnea Exacerbation of HFrEF Headache Nausea QT prolongation VT Visual disturbances Flecainide is a substrate for CYP2D6 These drugs may increase plasma  flecainide concentrations: Amiodarone Duloxetine Fluoxetine Paroxetine Propafenone N/A 150–300 mg PO q 8 h,  ER 225–425 PO q 12 h Liver 9 h Inhibits INa Atrial flutter Bradycardia A V block Dizziness Dyspnea Exacerbation of HFrEF Nausea Taste disturbances VT Visual disturbances Propafenone is a substrate for CYP2D6 These drugs may increase plasma  propafenone concentrations: Fluoxetine Paroxetine Propafenone may increase plasma  digoxin concentrations Propafenone may increase plasma  warfarin concentrations Sotalol CrCl >60 mL/min:  40–80 mg twice  daily for 3 d CrCl: 40–60 mL/ min: 80 mg once  daily for 3 d CrCl <40 mL/min:  Contraindicated CrCl >60 mL/min: 80– 160 mg twice daily CrCl: 40–60 mL/min:  80–160 mg once daily CrCl <40 mL/min:  Contraindicated Kidney 12 h Inhibits IKr Beta  blocker d-Sotalol  augments late INa A V block Bradycardia Bronchospasm Diarrhea Exacerbation of HFrEF Fatigue Nausea and vomiting QT prolongation TdP None *Moderate inhibitor: Causes a 2-fold to <5-fold increase in AUC or a 50% to 80% decrease in clearance.†Mild inhibitor: Causes a ≥1.25-fold but <2-fold increase in AUC or a 20% to 50% decrease in clearance.‡Lovastatin doses should not exceed 40 mg daily in patients taking amiodarone.§Simvastatin doses should not exceed 20 mg daily in patients taking amiodarone.∥Simvastatin doses should not exceed 10 mg daily in patients taking dronedarone. Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 297 ¶Percentage of a dose excreted unchanged in urine. AF indicates atrial fibrillation; AUC, area under the plasma concentration versus time curve; A V , atrioventricular; CrCl, creatinine clearance; CYP cytochrome P-450; ER, extended release; HFrEF, heart  failure with reduced ejection fraction; IV , intravenous; N/A, not applicable; NAPA, N-acetylprocainamide; p-gp, p-glycoprotein; PO, orally; TdP, torsades de pointes; and VT, ventricular tachycardia. Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 298 Table 24. Recommended Monitoring for Patients Taking Oral Amiodarone Adverse Effect Baseline Testing Initial Follow-Up Testing Additional Follow-Up Testing Hypo- or hyperthyroidism TSH (T4 and T3 if TSH abnormal) 3–6 mo Every 6 mo Hepatotoxicity AST, ALT 3–6 mo Every 6 mo QT interval prolongation ECG Annually – Interstitial lung disease Chest x-ray: Recommended CT chest: Not recommended Chest x-ray: Unexplained cough or dyspnea or other signs/ symptoms suspicious for interstitial lung disease CT chest: As indicated to follow-up ongoing symptoms  or chest x-ray findings Corneal microdeposits (epithelial  keratopathy) Not recommended Development of visual abnormalities, which may indicate  optic neuropathy – Dermatologic (blue-gray skin  discoloration), photosensitivity Not recommended Physical examination annually Development of skin discoloration, severe sunburn Neurological Not recommended Physical examination annually Development of peripheral neuropathy or other  neurological abnormalities ALT indicates alanine transaminase; AST, aspartate transaminase; CT, computed tomography; ECG, electrocardiogram; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone; and TdP torsades de pointes. Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 299 Table 25. Recommended Monitoring for Patients Taking Other Antiarrhythmic Drugs Drug Baseline Testing Follow-Up Testing Additional Follow-Up Testing Dofetilide 12-lead ECG * Continuous electrocardiographic monitoring during 3d hospitalization for dofetilide initiation Serum potassium and magnesium concentration Serum creatinine for estimation of CrCl In 3–6 mo: 1 2-lead ECG * Serum potassium and magnesium concentration Serum creatinine for estimation of CrCl Every 3–6 mo (more frequently for patients  concomitantly taking other QT intervalprolonging drugs or with changing kidney  function: 1 2-lead ECG * Serum potassium and magnesium  concentration Serum creatinine for estimation of CrCl Dronedarone 12-lead ECG * AST † ALT † Within first 6 mo: AST † ALT † – Ibutilide 12-lead ECG * Determination of serum potassium and magnesium  concentrations and correction of hypokalemia and/or  hypomagnesemia is recommended before initiation of  the infusion Continuous electrocardiographic monitoring for assessment of QTc  interval duration is recommended for at least 4 h after infusion or  until the QTc has returned to baseline to minimize the risk of ibutilideassociated TdP – Procainamide 12-lead ECG * BP Electrocardiographic monitoring for assessment of rhythm, QRS width  and QTc interval is recommended during the infusion to minimize  the risk of procainamide-associated ventricular proarrhythmia, including  TdP BP monitoring is recommended during the infusion to detect  clinically relevant hypotension – Sotalol 12-lead ECG * Continuous electrocardiographic monitoring during 3d hospitalization for sotalol initiation Serum potassium and magnesium concentration Serum creatinine for estimation of CrCl In 3–6 mo: 12-lead ECG * Serum potassium and magnesium concentration Serum creatinine for estimation of CrCl Every 3–6 mo (more frequently for patients  concomitantly taking other QT intervalprolonging drugs or with changing kidney  function: 12-lead ECG * Serum potassium and magnesium  concentration Serum creatinine for estimation of CrCl *Assess rhythm and calculate QTc.†To facilitate early detection of potential dronedarone-associated hepatotoxicity. ALT indicates alanine transaminase; AST, aspartame transaminase; BP, blood pressure; ECG, electrocardiogram; CrCl, creatinine clearance; and TdP, torsades de pointes. Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 300 Table 26. Complications After AF Catheter Ablation Complication Frequency of Complication1–4 Timing of Complication Signs and Symptoms Diagnosis Treatment LA-esophageal fistula 0.2% 1–4 wk Chest pain, pain with swallowing,  fever, stroke symptoms CT scan of chest Surgery Cardiac perforation with  tamponade 0.4%–1.5% During procedure Hypotension Echocardiography Pericardiocentesis CV A/TIA 0.1%–1.0% During procedure and up to 1 wk Neurological findings MRI or CT scan Anticoagulate when safe PV stenosis 0.1%–0.8% Months Dyspnea, hemoptysis MRI or CT scan Stent Phrenic nerve paralysis 0.2%–0.4% During procedure Dyspnea Fluoroscopy Time Vascular access complications 1%–7% During procedure and up to 1 mo Pain, swelling at access site Ultrasound or CT scan Observation Vascular access complications  requiring surgery 0.1%–0.3% During procedure and up to 1 mo Pain and swelling at access site Ultrasound or CT scan Surgery Death 0.1%–0.4% During procedure Pneumonia 0.4%–1.0% Days Cough, fever Chest x-ray Antibiotics AF indicates atrial fibrillation; CT, computed tomography; CV A, cerebrovascular accident; LA, left atrial; PV , pulmonary vein; TIA, transient ischemic attack; and MRI, magnetic resonance imaging. Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 301 Table 27. Randomized Trials of Rhythm Control in HF Study/ Author (y) No.  Pts. Inclusion Exclusion Intervention Primary  Outcome Death and  Hospitalization Death Hospital  izations Reduction  in AF LVEF QOL 6MWT Peak  VO2  Max BNP Roy  (2008)60 1376 LVEF  <35%,  CHF AAD  (primarily  amiodarone)  vs rate  control Cardiovascular  mortality was  no different  between  rhythm vs rate  control No change No  difference No  difference MacDonald  (2011)8 41 Persistent  AF;  LVEF  <35%,  CHF IIIV PAF;  QRS  >150 RF to  medical  therapy Similar  increase in  CMR LVEF No  difference Improved  with RF Improved No  change No  change ARC-HF:  Jones  (2013)6 52 Persistent  AF;  LVEF  <35%,  CHF RF to  medical  therapy Improvement  in peak VO2  with RF No change No  difference No  difference No  change Improved  with RF No  change Improved CAMTAF  (2014)5 50 Persistent  AF;  LVEF  <50%;  CHF RF to  medical  therapy LVEF  significantly  improved with  RF No change No  difference Improved Improved  with RF Improved AATAC  (2016)4 203 Persistent  AF;  LVEF  <40%,  CHF IIIII RF to  amiodarone At 24 mo, RF  patients more  likely to be in  NSR Improvement  with RF Improved Improved Improved Improved  with  ablation Improved CAMERA  MRI  (2017)12 66 Persistent  AF;  LVEF  <45%,  CHF IIIII;  idiopathic  CM RF to  medical  therapy Improved  LVEF with RF Improved No  change No  change Improved CASTLEAF (2018)9 363 PAF or  persistent  AF;  LVEF  <36%,  CHF IIRF to  medical  therapy Composite of  death and  hospitalization  lower with RF Improvement  with RF Improved Improved Improved Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 302 Study/ Author (y) No.  Pts. Inclusion Exclusion Intervention Primary  Outcome Death and  Hospitalization Death Hospital  izations Reduction  in AF LVEF QOL 6MWT Peak  VO2  Max BNP IV and  ICD AMICA  (2019)7 140 Persistent  AF;  LVEF  <36% RF to  medical  therapy No difference  in change in  LVEF No  change No  change No  change No  change CABANA  substudy  (2021)14 778 Clinical  HF  (largely  HFpEF) RF to  medical  therapy Decrease in  composite of  MACE Improved Improved  with RF Improved  with RF RAFT-AF  (2022)11 411 ≥4 PAF/y  or  persistent  AF,  NYHA  class II or  III HF,  elevated  pro-BNP RF to  medical  therapy No difference  in change in  mortality/HF No difference  in change in  mortality/HF No  change No  change Improved  with RF Improved  with RF Improved  with RF Improved  with RF Improved  with RF MetaanalysisTuragam  (2019)13 775 RF to  medical  therapy Improved Reduced Improved Improved Improved Improved MetaanalysisChen  (2020)3 1112 RF to  medical  therapy Improved Reduced Improved  with RF Improved Improved MetaanalysisPan  (2021)10 775 RF to  medical  therapy Improved Reduced Improved Improved Improved AAD indicates antiarrhythmic drug; AATAC, Ablation vs Amiodarone for Treatment of Atrial Fibrillation in Patients With Congestive Heart Failure and an Implanted ICD/CRTD; AF, atrial fibrillation;  AMICA, Atrial Fibrillation Management in Congestive Heart Failure With Ablation; ARC-HF, A Randomised Trial to Assess Catheter Ablation Versus Rate Control in the Management of Persistent  Atrial Fibrillation in Chronic Heart Failure; BNP, brain natriuretic peptide; CABANA, Catheter Ablation vs Antiarrhythmic Drug Therapy for Atrial Fibrillation; CAMERA MRI, Catheter Ablation versus  Medical Rate Control in Atrial Fibrillation and Systolic Dysfunction-an MRI-Guided Multi-centre Randomised Controlled Trial; CAMTAF, Catheter Ablation Versus Medical Treatment of AF in Heart  Failure; CASTLE-AF, Catheter Ablation versus Standard Conventional Therapy in Patients with Left Ventricular Dysfunction and Atrial Fibrillation; CHF, congestive heart failure; CM, cardiomyopathy;  CMR, cardiac magnetic resonance: HF, heart failure; HFpEF, heart failure with persistent ejection fraction; ICD, implantable cardioverter-defibrillator; LVEF, left ventricular ejection fraction; MACE, major  adverse cardiovascular events; NSR, normal sinus rhythm; NYHA, New York Heart Association; PAF, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation; QOL, quality of life; RAFT-AF, Rhythm Control–Catheter Ablation  With or Without Anti-arrhythmic Drug Control of Maintaining Sinus Rhythm Versus Rate Control With Medical Therapy and/or Atrio-ventricular Junction Ablation and Pacemaker Treatment for Atrial  Fibrillation; RF, radiofrequency; VO2 max, maximal oxygen consumption; and 6MWT, 6-minute walk test. Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 303 Table 28. Anticoagulation Strategies During Pregnancy Antenatal Options Method 1 Method 2 Method 3 Alternative Method 4 First trimester Warfarin ≤5 mg LMWH UFH LMWH Second trimester Warfarin Warfarin Warfarin LMWH Third trimester Warfarin Warfarin Warfarin LMWH Delivery Planning Method 1 Method 2 1 wk before Discontinue warfarin → continuous IV U FH Dose-adjusted LMWH 36 h before Continuous IV UFH Switch to continuous IV UFH 4–6 h before Stop IV heparin Stop IV heparin Adapted with permission from Otto et al.15 Copyright 2021 American Heart Association, Inc., and American College of Cardiology Foundation. IV indicates intravenous; LMWH, low-molecular-weight heparin; and UFH, unfractionated heparin. Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 304 Table 29. Medical Cancer Therapy Associated With Increased Risk of AF (>1%) Frequency Reported in Clinical  Trials and Observational  Studies Cancer Therapy Common:  Incidence 1%– 10% Frequent:  >10% Comments Anthracyclines AF may be a secondary result of anthracycline cardiotoxicity; studies in different populations demonstrate variable  risk of AFDoxorubicin, epirubicin, idarubicin,  mitoxantrone X Antimetabolites Clofarabine combined with  cytarabine X 5FU X Cepecitabine X Gemcitabine X Alkylating agents *Stem cell transplantation is associated with an increased risk of AF,28,29 and the risk may be higher with melphalanassociated regimens.Cyclophosphamide X Melphalan + stem cell transplantation X* Immunomodulatory drugs Given rates reported from patients with multiple myeloma, AF due to underlying cardiac AL amyloid may contribute Lenalidomide X Interleukin-2 X TKIs †Reported AF rates with ibrutinib have varied across trials (4%–18%),6,30 partly related to varying duration of  follow-up and patient factors. Second-generation BTKis have more selective BTK activity and are associated with a lower incidence of AF than  ibrutinib.31 Based on FDA adverse event reporting system4 Ibrutinib (BTKi) X† X† Acalbrutinib (second-generation  BTKi) X Zanubrutinib (second-generation  BTKi) X Ponatinib (BCR-ABL TKI) and other  TKIs (eg, trametinib, osimertinib,  nilotinib, ribociclib) X VEGF inhibitor Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 305 Frequency Reported in Clinical  Trials and Observational  Studies Cancer Therapy Common:  Incidence 1%– 10% Frequent:  >10% Comments Sorafenib in combination with 5FU X BRAF inhibitor Vemurafenib X CAR T-cell therapy Tisagenlecleucel X Axicabtagene ciloleucel X Monoclonal antibodies Rituximab X Table developed by 2023 Atrial Fibrillation Guideline Writing Committee. Data extracted from Buza et al32 and Fradley et al.33 AF indicates atrial fibrillation; BTKi, Bruton’s kinase inhibitor; CAR, chimeric antigen receptor; FDA, US Food and Drug Administration; 5FU, 5 fluorouracil; and TKI, tyrosine kinase inhibitor. Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript et al. Page 306 Table 30. Special Considerations for Anticoagulation in Patients With AF on Active Cancer Treatment Increased bleeding risk High bleeding risk estimators (eg, HAS-BLED) Thrombocytopenia (platelet <50 000/uL) Intracranial malignancy Gastrointestinal malignancy History of major bleeding Severe kidney dysfunction (eGFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m2) Drug interactions P-glycoprotein inducers or inhibitors CYP3A4 inducers or inhibitors AF indicates atrial fibrillation; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate; and HAS-BLED, hypertension, abnormal renal/liver function, stroke,  bleeding history or predisposition, labile international normalized ratio (INR), elderly (age ≥65 years), drugs/alcohol concomitantly). Circulation. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 May 15.